# Diabetes Care

# Volume 48, Supplement 1, January 2025

# 16. Diabetes Care in the Hospital:

American Diabetes Association Professional Practice Committee*

# Standards of Care in Diabetes—2025

Diabetes Care 2025;48(Suppl. 1):S321–S334 | https://doi.org/10.2337/dc25-S016

Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/48/Supplement_1/S321/791476/dc25s016.pdf by guest on 16 December 2024

# 16. DIABETES CARE IN THE HOSPITAL

The American Diabetes Association (ADA) “Standards of Care in Diabetes” includes the ADA’s current clinical practice recommendations and is intended to provide the components of diabetes care, general treatment goals and guidelines, and tools to evaluate quality of care. Members of the ADA Professional Practice Committee, an interprofessional expert committee, are responsible for updating the Standards of Care annually, or more frequently as warranted. For a detailed description of ADA standards, statements, and reports, as well as the evidence-grading system for ADA’s clinical practice recommendations and a full list of Professional Practice Committee members, please refer to Introduction and Methodology. Readers who wish to comment on the Standards of Care are invited to do so at professional.diabetes.org/SOC.

Among hospitalized individuals, hyperglycemia, hypoglycemia, and glucose variability are associated with adverse outcomes, including increased morbidity and mortality (1). Identification and careful management of people with diabetes and dysglycemia during hospitalization has direct and immediate benefits. Diabetes management in the inpatient setting is facilitated by identification and treatment of hyperglycemia prior to elective procedures, a dedicated inpatient diabetes management service applying validated standards of care, and a proactive transition plan for outpatient diabetes care with timely scheduled follow-up appointments. These steps can improve outcomes, shorten hospital stays, and reduce the need for readmission and emergency department visits. For older hospitalized individuals or for people with diabetes in long-term care facilities, please see Section 13, “Older Adults.”

# HOSPITAL CARE DELIVERY STANDARDS

# Recommendations

16.1 Perform an A1C test on all people with diabetes or hyperglycemia (random blood glucose >140 mg/dL [>7.8 mmol/L]) admitted to the hospital if no A1C test result is available from the prior 3 months. B

16.2 Institutions should implement protocols using validated written or computerized provider order entry sets for management of dysglycemia in the hospital that allow for a personalized approach. B

# Considerations on Admission

High-quality hospital care for diabetes requires clear and actionable standards for care delivery, which are best implemented using structured order sets and quality improvement strategies for process improvement. Unfortunately, “best practice” protocols,

*A complete list of members of the American Diabetes Association Professional Practice Committee can be found at https://doi.org/10.2337/dc25-SINT.

Duality of interest information for each author is available at https://doi.org/10.2337/dc25-SDIS.

Suggested citation: American Diabetes Association Professional Practice Committee. 16. Diabetes care in the hospital: Standards of Care in Diabetes—2025. Diabetes Care 2025;48(Suppl. 1): S321–S334

© 2024 by the American Diabetes Association. Readers may use this article as long as the work is properly cited, the use is educational and not for profit, and the work is not altered. More information is available at https://www.diabetesjournals.org/journals/pages/license.

---

# Diabetes Care in the Hospital

# Diabetes Care Volume 48, Supplement 1, January 2025

Reviews, and guidelines are inconsistently implemented within hospitals (2). To correct this, medical centers striving for optimal inpatient diabetes treatment should establish protocols and structured order sets, which include computerized provider order entry (CPOE). Institutions are encouraged to perform audits regularly to monitor proper use and institute educational/training programs to update staff on an ongoing basis.

Initial evaluation should state the type of diabetes (i.e., type 1, type 2, gestational, pancreatogenic, stress hyperglycemia, drug related, or nutrition related [e.g., enteral or parenteral nutrition]) when it is known. Because inpatient treatment and discharge planning are more effective when preadmission glycemia is considered, A1C should be measured for all people with diabetes or dysglycemia admitted to the hospital if no A1C test result is available from the previous 3 months (3,4). In addition, diabetes self-management knowledge and behaviors should be assessed on admission, and diabetes self-management education should be provided throughout the hospital stay, especially if a new treatment plan is being considered. Diabetes self-management education should include the knowledge and skills needed after discharge, such as medication dosing and administration, glucose monitoring, and recognition and treatment of hypoglycemia (5). Evidence supports preadmission treatment of hyperglycemia in people scheduled for elective surgery as an effective means of reducing adverse outcomes (6,7).

The National Academy of Medicine recommends CPOE to prevent medication-related errors and to increase medication administration efficiency (8). Systematic reviews of randomized controlled trials using computerized assistance to improve glycemic outcomes in the hospital found significant improvement in the percentage of time individuals spent in the glycemic goal range, lower mean blood glucose levels, and no increase in hypoglycemia (9). Where feasible, there should be structured order sets that provide computerized guidance for glycemic management. Insulin dosing algorithms using machine learning and data in the electronic health record (EHR) currently in development show promise for predicting insulin requirements during hospitalization (10,11).

# Diabetes Care Specialists in the Hospital

# Recommendation

16.3 When caring for hospitalized people with diabetes (with an existing or new diagnosis) or stress hyperglycemia, consult with a specialized diabetes or glucose management team when available. B

16.5a Once therapy is initiated, a glycemic goal of 140–180 mg/dL (7.8–10.0 mmol/L) is recommended for most critically ill individuals (those in the ICU) with hyperglycemia. A More stringent individualized glycemic goals may be appropriate for selected critically ill individuals if they can be achieved without significant hypoglycemia. B

16.5b For noncritically ill individuals (those not in the ICU), a glycemic goal of 100–180 mg/dL (5.6-10.0 mmol/L) is recommended if it can be achieved without significant hypoglycemia. B

Care provided by appropriately trained specialists or specialty teams may reduce the length of stay and improve glycemic and other clinical outcomes (12–14). In addition, the increased risk of 30-day readmission following hospitalization that has been attributed to diabetes can be reduced, and costs saved, when inpatient care is provided by a specialized diabetes management team (12,15,16). In a cross-sectional study comparing usual care to specialists reviewing diabetes cases and making recommendations virtually through the EHR, rates of both hyperglycemia and hypoglycemia were reduced by 30–40% (17). Providing diabetes self-management education and developing a diabetes discharge plan that includes continued access to diabetes medications and supplies and ongoing education and support are key strategies to improve long-term outcomes (18,19). Details of diabetes care team composition and other resources are available from the Joint Commission accreditation program for the hospital care of diabetes, the Society of Hospital Medicine workbook, and the Joint British Diabetes Societies (JBDS) for Inpatient Care Group (20–22).

# GLYCEMIC GOALS IN HOSPITALIZED ADULTS

# Recommendations

16.4a Insulin should be initiated or intensified for treatment of persistent hyperglycemia starting at a threshold of ≥180 mg/dL (≥10.0 mmol/L) (confirmed on two occasions within 24 h) for the majority of critically ill individuals (those in the intensive care unit [ICU]). A

16.4b Insulin and/or other glucose-lowering therapies should be initiated or intensified for treatment of persistent hyperglycemia starting at a threshold of ≥180 mg/dL (≥10.0 mmol/L) (confirmed on two occasions within 24 h) for the majority of noncritically ill individuals (those not in the ICU). B

---

# Diabetes Care in the Hospital

Individuals could have immediate benefits. However, several multicenter studies, including the Normoglycemia in Intensive Care Evaluation and Survival Using Glucose Algorithm Regulation (NICE-SUGAR) trial, in critically ill hospitalized individuals in medical and surgical ICUs (27–29) led to a reconsideration of the optimal glucose lowering goal in critical illness. In these trials, critically ill individuals randomized to intensive glycemic management (80–110 mg/dL [4.4–6.1 mmol/L]) derived no significant treatment advantage compared with a group with more moderate glycemic goals (140–180 mg/dL [7.8–10.0 mmol/L]) and had slightly but significantly higher mortality (27.5% vs. 25%). The intensively treated group had 10- to 15-fold greater rates of hypoglycemia, which may have contributed to the adverse outcomes noted. The findings from the NICE-SUGAR trial, supported by several meta-analyses and a randomized controlled trial, showed higher rates of hypoglycemia and an increase in mortality with more aggressive glycemic management goals compared with moderate glycemic goals (27,30,31). Based on these results, insulin and/or other therapies should be initiated for the treatment of persistent hyperglycemia ≥180 mg/dL ($10.0 mmol/L). Once therapy is initiated, a glycemic goal of 140–180 mg/dL (7.8–10.0 mmol/L) is recommended for most critically ill individuals with hyperglycemia. Although not as well supported by data from randomized controlled trials, these recommendations have been extended to hospitalized individuals without critical illness. More stringent glycemic goals, such as 110–140 mg/dL (6.1–7.8 mmol/L), may be appropriate for selected individuals (e.g., critically ill individuals undergoing cardiac surgery) if they can be achieved without significant hypoglycemia (32,33).

# GLUCOSE MONITORING

In hospitalized individuals with diabetes who are eating, point-of-care (POC) blood glucose monitoring should be performed before meals; in those not eating, glucose monitoring is advised every 4–6 h (34). More frequent POC blood glucose monitoring ranging from every 30 min to every 2 h is the required standard for safe use of intravenous insulin therapy. Hospital blood glucose monitoring should be performed with U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA)-approved POC hospital-calibrated glucose monitoring systems (36). POC blood glucose meters are not as accurate or as precise as laboratory glucose analyzers, and capillary blood glucose readings are subject to artifacts due to perfusion, edema, anemia/erythrocytosis, and several medications commonly used in the hospital (36).

Several studies have demonstrated that inpatient use of continuous glucose monitoring (CGM) has advantages over POC glucose monitoring in detecting hypoglycemia, particularly nocturnal, prolonged and/or asymptomatic hypoglycemia (40–42), and in reducing recurrent hypoglycemia (43,44). However, at this time, initiating use of a new CGM device has not been approved by the FDA. During the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic, many institutions used CGM in ICU and non-ICU settings, with the aim of minimizing exposure time and saving personal protective equipment, under an FDA policy of enforcement discretion (45,46). Data on the safety and efficacy of real-time CGM use in the hospital, particularly with implementation of remote monitoring (e.g., a glucose telemetry system), is growing (44,46–49).

Continuation of personal CGM device use, particularly for people with type 1 or type 2 diabetes treated with intensive insulin therapy and at increased risk for hypoglycemia during hospitalization, is recommended. Confirmatory POC capillary blood glucose measurements should be performed for insulin dosing decisions and hypoglycemia assessment and treatment.

---

# Diabetes Care in the Hospital

# Diabetes Care Volume 48, Supplement 1, January 2025

# GLUCOSE-LOWERING TREATMENT IN HOSPITALIZED INDIVIDUALS

An individualized approach for glycemic management is encouraged throughout the hospital stay and should take into consideration several predictive factors for achieving glycemic goals, such as prior home use and doses of insulin or noninsulin therapy, expected level of insulin resistance, prior A1C, current glucose levels, oral intake, and duration of diabetes.

# Insulin Therapy

# Recommendations

16.8a Continuous intravenous insulin infusion is recommended for achieving glycemic goals and avoiding hypoglycemia in critically ill individuals.

16.8b Basal insulin or a basal plus bolus correction insulin plan is the preferred treatment for noncritically ill hospitalized individuals with poor or no oral intake.

# Critical Care Setting

Continuous intravenous insulin infusion is the most effective method for achieving specific glycemic goals and avoiding hypoglycemia in the critical care setting. Intravenous insulin infusions should be administered using validated written or computerized protocols that allow for predefined adjustments in the insulin infusion rate based on glycemic fluctuations and immediate past and current insulin infusion rates.

For diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA) and hyperglycemic hyperosmolar state (HHS) management, continuous intravenous insulin infusion is given for correction of hyperglycemia, hyperketonemia, and acid-base disorder following a fixed-rate intravenous insulin infusion or nurse-driven protocol with a variable rate based on glucose values.

# Noncritical Care Setting

In most instances, insulin is the preferred treatment for hyperglycemia in hospitalized individuals. In certain circumstances, it may be appropriate to continue home oral glucose-lowering medications or initiate use of agents such as dipeptidyl peptidase 4 inhibitors (DPP-4i).

# Type 1 Diabetes

For people with type 1 diabetes, dosing insulin based solely on premeal glucose levels does not account for basal insulin requirements or caloric intake and increases the risk of both hypoglycemia and hyperglycemia. Typically, basal insulin dosing is based on body weight and expected sensitivity to insulin, and there is some evidence that people with renal insufficiency should be treated with lower insulin doses.

# Footnotes

(42,46,50) (41,48) (60) (52) (53) (54) (61,62) (63) (64–66) (67) (68,69) (56–58) (59)

---

# Diabetes Care in the Hospital

Taking nothing by mouth, with the addition of prandial insulin when individuals are eating. Policies and best practice alerts in the EHR should be put in place to ensure that basal insulin (given subcutaneously, via insulin pump or by insulin infusion) is not held for people with type 1 diabetes, especially during care transitions, and that ongoing prescriber and nursing education is provided.

# Transitioning From Intravenous to Subcutaneous Insulin

When discontinuing intravenous insulin, a transition protocol is recommended, as it is associated with less morbidity and lower costs. Subcutaneous basal insulin should be given 2 h before intravenous infusion is discontinued, with the aim of minimizing rebound hyperglycemia while the subcutaneous insulin action rises.

Emerging data from studies in people with hyperglycemia with and without DKA show that the administration of a low dose (0.15–0.3 units/kg) of basal insulin analog in addition to intravenous insulin infusion may reduce the duration of insulin infusion and length of hospital stay and prevent rebound hyperglycemia without increased risk of hypoglycemia.

For transitioning, the total daily dose of subcutaneous insulin may be calculated based on the insulin infusion rate during the prior 6–8 h when stable glycemic goals were achieved, based on prior home insulin dose, or following a weight-based approach. For people being transitioned to concentrated insulin (U-200, U-300, or U-500) in the inpatient setting, it is important to ensure correct dosing by using a separate insulin pen or vial for each individual and by meticulous pharmacy and nursing supervision of the dose administered.

# Inpatient Hypoglycemia: Risk Factors, Treatment, and Prevention

Insulin is one of the most common medications that causes adverse events in hospitalized individuals. Errors in insulin dosing, missed doses, and/or administration errors including incorrect insulin type and/or timing of dose occur relatively frequently and include prescriber (ordering), pharmacy (dispensing), and nursing (administration) errors.

# Recommendations

16.12 A hypoglycemia management surveillance protocol should be adopted by all health systems. A plan for identifying, treating, and preventing hypoglycemia should be established for each individual. Episodes of hypoglycemia in the hospital should be documented in the health record and tracked to inform quality improvements.

16.13 Treatment plans should be reviewed and changed as necessary to prevent hypoglycemia and recurrent hypoglycemia when a blood glucose value of <70 mg/dL (<3.9 mmol/L) is documented. Kidney failure is an important risk factor for hypoglycemia in the hospital, possibly as a result of decreased insulin clearance.

---

# Diabetes Care in the Hospital

# Diabetes Care Volume 48, Supplement 1, January 2025

or prevented. Compared with baseline, preceding episode of hypoglycemia home, especially people wearing insulin pumps (108,109). Studies found that hypoglycemic events (<70 mg/dL [<3.9 mmol/L]) during the same admission (103). In another study of hypoglycemic episodes (defined as <50 mg/dL [<2.8 mmol/L]), 78% of individuals were taking basal insulin, with the incidence of hypoglycemia peaking between midnight and 6:00 A.M. Despite recognition of hypoglycemia, 75% of individuals did not have their dose of basal insulin changed before the next basal insulin administration (104). Several groups have developed algorithms to predict episodes of hypoglycemia in the inpatient setting (105,106). Models such as these are potentially important and, once validated for general use, could provide a valuable tool to reduce rates of hypoglycemia in the hospital. In one retrospective cohort study, a fasting blood glucose of <100 mg/dL was shown to be a predictor of next-day hypoglycemia (35).

# SELF-MANAGEMENT IN THE HOSPITAL

Diabetes self-management in the hospital may be appropriate for select individuals who wish to continue to perform self-care while acutely ill (110–112). Candidates include children with parental supervision, adolescents, and adults who successfully perform diabetes self-management at home and whose cognitive and physical skills needed to successfully self-administer insulin and perform glucose monitoring are not compromised (5,42). In addition, they should have adequate oral intake, be proficient in carbohydrate estimation, take multiple daily insulin injections or wear insulin pumps, have stable insulin requirements, and understand sick-day management. If self-management is supported, a policy should include a requirement that people with diabetes and the care team agree on a daily basis during hospitalization that self-management is appropriate. Hospital personal medication policies may include guidance for people with diabetes who wish to take their own or hospital-dispensed insulin and noninsulin injectable medications during their hospital stay. A hospital policy for personal medication may include a pharmacy exception on a case-by-case basis as determined in consultation with the care team. Pharmacy must verify any home medication and require a prescriber order for the individual to self-administer home or hospital-dispensed medication under the supervision of the registered nurse. If an insulin pump or CGM device is worn, hospital policy and procedures delineating guidelines for wearing an insulin pump and/or CGM device should be developed according to consensus guidelines, including the changing of insulin infusion sites and CGM glucose sensors (42,113). As outlined in Recommendations 7.31 and 7.32, people with diabetes wearing diabetes devices should be supported to continue them in an inpatient setting if they are assessed and deemed competent to perform self-care and proper supervision is available.

# MEDICAL NUTRITION THERAPY IN THE HOSPITAL

The goals of medical nutrition therapy in the hospital are to provide adequate calories to meet metabolic demands, optimize glycemic outcomes, address personal food preferences, and facilitate the creation of a discharge plan. The ADA does not endorse any single meal plan or specified percentages of macronutrients. Current nutrition recommendations advise individualization based on treatment goals, physiological parameters, and medication use. Controlled carbohydrate meal plans, where the amount of carbohydrate on each meal tray is calculated, are preferred by many hospitals, as they facilitate matching the prandial insulin dose to the amount of carbohydrate given (107). Orders should also indicate that the meal delivery and nutritional insulin coverage should be coordinated, as their variability often creates the possibility of hyperglycemic and hypoglycemic events (18). Some hospitals offer “meals on demand,” where individuals may order meals from the menu at any time during the day. This option improves patient satisfaction but complicates glucose monitoring–insulin–meal coordination and can lead to insulin stacking if meals are too close together. Finally, if the hospital food service supports carbohydrate counting, this option should be made available to people with diabetes counting carbohydrates at the time.

# PREDICTING AND PREVENTING HYPOGLYCEMIA

In people with diabetes, it is well established that an episode of severe hypoglycemia increases the risk for a subsequent event, partly because of impaired counterregulation (102). In a study of hospitalized individuals, 84% of people who had an episode of severe hypoglycemia (defined as <40 mg/dL [<2.2 mmol/L]) had a...

# STANDARDS FOR SPECIAL SITUATIONS

# Enteral and Parenteral Feedings

For individuals receiving enteral or parenteral nutrition who require insulin, ...

---

# Diabetes Care in the Hospital

The insulin orders should include coverage of basal, prandial, and correctional needs (108,114,115). It is essential that people with type 1 diabetes continue to receive basal insulin even if feedings are discontinued.

Most adults receiving basal insulin should continue with their basal dose, while the insulin dose for the total daily nutritional component may be calculated as 1 unit of insulin for every 10–15 g of carbohydrate in the enteral and parenteral formulas. Commercially available cans of enteral nutrition contain variable amounts of carbohydrates and may be infused at different rates (109).

All of this must be considered when calculating insulin doses to cover the nutritional component of enteral nutrition (109). Giving NPH insulin two or three times daily (every 8 or 12 h) or regular insulin every 6 h to cover individual requirements are reasonable options. Adjustments in insulin doses should be made frequently. Correctional insulin should also be administered subcutaneously every 6 h with regular human insulin or rapid-acting insulin every 4 h. If enteral nutrition is interrupted, a dextrose infusion should be started immediately to prevent hypoglycemia and to allow time to determine more appropriate insulin doses.

# Glucocorticoid Therapy

The prevalence of consistent use of glucocorticoid therapy in hospitalized individuals can approach 10–15%, and these medications can induce hyperglycemia in 56–86% of these individuals with and without preexisting diabetes (118,119). If left untreated, this hyperglycemia increases mortality and morbidity risk, e.g., infections and cardiovascular events. Glucocorticoid type and duration of action must be considered in determining appropriate insulin treatments. Daily-ingested intermediate-acting glucocorticoids such as prednisone reach peak plasma levels in 4–6 h (120) but have pharmacologic actions that can last throughout the day.

When monitored by CGM, the typical glycemic pattern for individuals treated with daily prednisone or prednisolone, administered in the morning, is characterized by normal or mild fasting hyperglycemia, with trends of increasing hyperglycemia during the afternoon, and peaking in the evening. These hyperglycemic excursions are more pronounced in individuals with type 2 diabetes than in those without diabetes (121).

# Perioperative Care

It is estimated that up to 20% of individuals undergoing general surgery have diabetes, and 23–60% have prediabetes or undiagnosed diabetes. Surgical stress and counterregulatory hormone release increase the risk of hyperglycemia as well as mortality, infection, and length of stay (109,126,127). There is little data available to guide care of people with diabetes through the perioperative period. To reduce surgical risk in these individuals, some institutions (126,128,129) have A1C cutoffs for elective surgeries, and some have developed optimization programs to lower A1C prior to surgery (126,128–130).

# Approaches

1. A preoperative risk assessment should be performed for people with diabetes who are at high risk for ischemic heart disease and those with autonomic neuropathy or renal failure.
2. The A1C goal for elective surgeries should be <8% (<64.0 mmol/L) whenever possible.
3. The blood glucose goal in the perioperative period should be 100–180 mg/dL (5.6–10.0 mmol/L) (126) within 4 h of the surgery. CGM should not be used alone for glucose monitoring during surgery (129).
4. Metformin should be held on the day of surgery.
5. SGLT2 inhibitors should be discontinued 3–4 days before surgery.
6. Other oral glucose-lowering agents should be held the morning of surgery or procedure.
7. Insulin dose reductions include NPH insulin to one-half of the dose or long-acting basal insulin analogs.

---

# Diabetes Care in the Hospital

# Diabetes Care Volume 48, Supplement 1, January 2025

to 75–80% of the dose or adjust-ment of insulin pump (if not in automated mode) basal rates based on the type of diabetes and clinical judgment (see Section 7, “Diabetes Technology”).

1. Monitor blood glucose at least every 2–4 h while the individual takes nothing by mouth and administer short- or rapid-acting insulin as needed.
2. Stricter perioperative glycemic goals are not advised, as perioperative glycemic goals stricter than 80–180 mg/dL (4.4–10.0 mmol/L) may not improve outcomes and are associated with increased hypoglycemia (128).
3. Compared with usual dosing, a reduction of 25% of basal insulin dose given the evening before surgery is more likely to achieve perioperative blood glucose goals with a lower risk for hypoglycemia (131).
4. In individuals undergoing noncardiac general surgery, basal insulin plus pre-meal short- or rapid-acting insulin (basal-bolus) coverage has been associated with improved glycemic outcomes and lower rates of perioperative complications compared with the reactive, correction-only short- or rapid-acting insulin coverage alone with no basal insulin dosing (60,126).
5. There is little data on the safe use and/or influence of GLP-1 RAs on glycemia and delayed gastric emptying in the perioperative period.
6. Manage diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA) and hyperglycemic hyperosmolar state (HHS) by administering intravenous fluids, insulin, and electrolytes (Fig. 16.1) and by closely monitoring during treatment, ensuring timely and bridged transition to maintenance subcutaneous insulin administration, and treatment of any concurrent infections.
7. The discharge planning process should include education on the recognition, prevention, and management of DKA and/or HHS for all individuals affected by or at high risk for these events to prevent recurrence and readmission.

# TRANSITION FROM THE HOSPITAL TO THE AMBULATORY SETTING

Recommendation

1. A structured discharge plan should be tailored to the individual with diabetes. B

Despite the safety concerns around the use of GLP-1 RA and dual GIP and GLP-1 RA drugs in the perioperative setting, there is a need for guidance for individual risk assessment and mitigation.

Management goals include restoration of circulatory volume and tissue perfusion, resolution of ketoacidosis, and correction of electrolyte imbalance and acidosis. It is also essential to treat any correctable underlying cause of DKA, such as sepsis.

---


diabetesjournals.org/care                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Diabetes Care in the Hospital                                                                              S329

| I.V. Fluids | Insulin | Potassium |
|-------------|---------|-----------|
| | Mild DKA | Moderate or severe DKA | HHS | Establish adequate renal function (urine output >0.5 mL/kg/h) |
| Determine hydration status | | | | |
| | s.c. insulin | i.v. insulin | i.v. insulin | K+ <3.5 mmol/L |
| Severe hypovolemia | Mild hypovolemia | Cardiac compromise | | | | |
| | 0.1 units/kg rapid-acting insulin analog as s.c. bolus | Consider 0.1 units/kg short-acting insulin as i.v. bolus if there is a delay in setting up the infusion | Start 0.05 units/kg/h short-acting insulin as fixed-rate i.v. infusion or nurse-driven protocol with a variable rate based on glucose values | 10–20 mmol/L/h until K+ >3.5 mmol/L (faster K+ replacement will require central venous access) |
| 0.9% NaCl or other crystalloid (15–20 mL/kg/h) | | Hemodynamic monitoring/pressors | 0.1 units/kg rapid-acting insulin analog every 1 h or 0.2 units/kg every 2 h | 0.1 units/kg/h short-acting insulin i.v. fixed-rate i.v. insulin infusion or nurse-driven protocol with a variable rate based on glucose values | | K+ 3.5–5.0 mmol/L |
| | | | | | | Give 20–30 mmol K+ in each liter of i.v. fluid as needed to keep serum K+ between 4 and 5 mmol/L |
| 0.9% NaCl or other crystalloid at a clinically appropriate rate aiming to replace 50% of the estimated fluid deficit in the first 8–12 h | | | When glucose reduces to <250 mg/dL, reduce short-acting insulin dose to 0.05 units/kg/h i.v. (or 0.05 units/kg/h or 0.1 units/kg every 2 h s.c.) or nurse-driven protocol with a variable rate based on glucose values | | | K+ >5.0 mmol/L |
| When glucose reduces to <200 mg/dL, add dextrose to the 0.9% NaCl/crystalloid. In euglycemia, dextrose needs to be started alongside 0.9% NaCl/crystalloid at the start of the insulin treatment | | DKA | HHS | | Start insulin, but do not give K+; check serum K+ every 2 h |
| | | Keep glucose between 150 and 200 mg/dL until resolution* | Target glucose to between 200 and 250 mg/dL until resolution* | | |
| Check electrolytes, renal function, venous pH, osmolality, and glucose every 2–4 h until stable. After resolution of DKA or HHS and when patient is able to eat and drink, initiate s.c. multidose insulin plan. To transfer from i.v. to maintenance s.c. insulin, continue i.v. insulin infusion for 1–2 h after s.c. insulin. | | | | | |

† Some have recommended that insulin be withheld until glucose has stopped dropping with fluid administration alone.
* Definitions of resolution (use clinical judgment and do not delay discharge or level of care if these are not met):
  - Anion gap ≤12 mmol/L and/or venous pH >7.3 or bicarbonate ≥15 mmol/L
  - Serum β-hydroxybutyrate <1.0 mmol/L or negative urine ketones
  - Calculated serum osmolality falls to <310 mOsm/kg and urine output >0.5 mL/kg/h

DKA: Bicarbonate should only be considered if pH <6.9.
HHS: Phosphate should not be given unless there is muscle weakness, respiratory compromise, or cardiac dysfunction and serum phosphate is <1.0 mmol/L

Figure 16.1—Treatment pathways for diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA) and hyperglycemic hyperosmolar state (HHS). BOHB, β-hydroxybutyrate.
Adapted from Umpierrez et al. (70).

and/or face-to-face follow-up visits after discharge. Discharge planning should begin at admission and be updated as individual needs change (141,142). Individualization and shared decision-making is key when creating a safe and effective discharge plan.

The transition from the acute care setting presents risks for all people with diabetes. Individuals may be discharged to varied settings, including home (with or without visiting nurse services), assisted living, rehabilitation, or skilled nursing facilities. For individuals discharged to home or assisted living, the optimal discharge plan will need to consider diabetes type and severity, effects of the illness on blood glucose levels, and the individual's circumstances, capabilities, and preferences (19,143,144). See Section 13, "Older Adults," for more information.

An outpatient follow-up visit with primary care, endocrinology, or a diabetes care and education specialist within 1 month of discharge is advised for all individuals experiencing hyperglycemia and/or hypoglycemia in the hospital. If glycemic management medications are changed or glucose management is not optimal at discharge, an earlier appointment (in 1–2 weeks) is preferred, and frequent contact

to consider therapy adjustments may be needed to avoid hyperglycemia and hypoglycemia. A discharge algorithm for glycemic medication adjustment, based on admission A1C, diabetes medications before admission, and insulin usage during hospitalization was found useful to guide treatment decisions and significantly improve A1C after discharge (4).

Clear communication with outpatient health care professionals directly or via hospital discharge summaries facilitates safe transitions to outpatient care. Providing information regarding the root cause of hyperglycemia (or the plan for determining the cause), related complications and comorbidities, and recommended treatments can assist outpatient health care professionals as they assume ongoing care.

The Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality recommends that, at a minimum, discharge plans include the following (145):

Medication Reconciliation
• Home and hospital medications must be cross-checked to ensure that no chronic medications are stopped and to ensure the safety of new and old prescriptions.

• Prescriptions for new or changed medication should be filled and reviewed with the individual and care partners at or before discharge whenever possible.

Structured Discharge Communication

• Information on medication changes, pending tests and studies, and follow-up needs must be accurately and promptly communicated to outpatient health care professionals.
• Discharge summaries should be transmitted to the primary care health care professional as soon as possible after discharge.
• Scheduling follow-up appointments prior to discharge with people with diabetes agreeing to the time and place increases the likelihood that they will attend.

It is recommended that the following areas of knowledge be reviewed and addressed before hospital discharge:

• Identification of the health care professionals who will provide diabetes care after discharge.

---

# Diabetes Care in the Hospital

# Diabetes Care Volume 48, Supplement 1, January 2025

- Level of understanding related to the diabetes diagnosis, glucose monitoring, home glucose goals, and when to call a health care professional.
- Definition, recognition, treatment, and prevention of hyperglycemia and hypoglycemia.
- Information on choosing healthy food at home and referral to an outpatient registered dietitian nutritionist or diabetes care and education specialist to guide individualization of the meal plan, if needed.
- When and how to take blood glucose-lowering medications, including insulin administration and noninsulin injectables.
- Sick-day management (19,144).
- Proper use and disposal of diabetes supplies, e.g., insulin pens, pen needles, syringes, glucose meters, and lancets.

People with diabetes must be provided with appropriate durable medical equipment, medications, supplies (e.g., blood glucose test strips or CGM sensors), prescriptions, and appropriate education at the time of discharge to avoid a potentially dangerous hiatus in care.

# PREVENTING ADMISSIONS AND READMISSIONS

In people with diabetes, the hospital readmission rate is between 14% and 20%, which is nearly twice that in people without diabetes (141,146). This may result in increased diabetes distress and has significant financial implications. Of people with diabetes who are hospitalized, 30% have two or more hospital stays, and these admissions account for over 50% of hospital costs for diabetes (147). Factors contributing to readmission include male sex, longer duration of prior hospitalization, number of previous hospitalizations, number and severity of comorbidities, and lower socioeconomic and/or educational status; factors that may reduce readmission rates include scheduled home health visits and timely ambulatory follow-up care (141,146). While there is no standardized protocol to prevent readmissions, several successful strategies have been reported that identify high-risk individuals and offer some possible solutions (141). To prevent readmissions, monitor insulin adjustments for individuals admitted with A1C >9% (>75 mmol/).

# References

1. Seisa MO, Saadi S, Nayfeh T, et al. A systematic review supporting the Endocrine Society clinical practice guideline for the management of hyperglycemia in adults hospitalized for noncritical illness or undergoing elective surgical procedures. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2022;107:2139–2147.
2. Galindo RJ, Dhatariya K, Gomez-Peralta F, Umpierrez GE. Safety and efficacy of inpatient diabetes management with non-insulin agents: an overview of international practices. Curr Diab Rep 2022;22:237–246.
3. Pasquel FJ, Gomez-Huelgas R, Anzola I, et al. Predictive value of admission hemoglobin A1c on.
4. Umpierrez GE, Reyes D, Smiley D, et al. Hospital discharge algorithm based on admission HbA1c for the management of patients with type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Care 2014;37:2934–2939.
5. Nassar CM, Montero A, Magee MF. Inpatient diabetes education in the real world: an overview of guidelines and delivery models. Curr Diab Rep 2019;19:103.
6. Garg R, Schuman B, Bader A, et al. Effect of preoperative diabetes management on glycemic control and clinical outcomes after elective surgery. Ann Surg 2018;267:858–862.
7. Okabayashi T, Shima Y, Sumiyoshi T, et al. Intensive versus intermediate glucose control in surgical intensive care unit patients. Diabetes Care 2014;37:1516–1524.
8. Institute of Medicine. Preventing Medication Errors. Aspden P, Wolcott J, Bootman JL, Cronenwett LR, Eds. Washington, DC, National Academies Press, 2007.
9. Sly B, Russell AW, Sullivan C. Digital interventions to improve safety and quality of inpatient diabetes management: a systematic review. Int J Med Inform 2022;157:104596.
10. Nguyen M, Jankovic I, Kalesinskas L, Baiocchi M, Chen JH. Machine learning for initial insulin estimation in hospitalized patients. J Am Med Inform Assoc 2021;28:2212–2219.
11. Zale A, Mathioudakis N. Machine learning models for inpatient glucose prediction. Curr Diab Rep 2022;22:353–364.
12. Akiboye F, Sihre HK, Al Mulhem M, Rayman G, Nirantharakumar K, Adderley NJ. Impact of diabetes specialist nurses on inpatient care: a systematic review. Diabet Med 2021;38:e14573.
13. Demidowich AP, Batty K, Love T, et al. Effects of a dedicated inpatient diabetes management service on glycemic control in a community hospital setting. J Diabetes Sci Technol 2021;15:546–552.
14. Haque WZ, Demidowich AP, Sidhaye A, Golden SH, Zilbermint M. The financial impact of an inpatient diabetes management service. Curr Diab Rep 2021;21:5.
15. Bansal V, Mottalib A, Pawar TK, et al. Inpatient diabetes management by specialized diabetes team versus primary service team in non-critical care units: impact on 30-day readmission rate and hospital cost. BMJ Open Diabetes Res Care 2018;6:e000460.
16. Ostling S, Wyckoff J, Ciarkowski SL, et al. The relationship between diabetes mellitus and 30-day readmission rates. Clin Diabetes Endocrinol 2017;3:3.
17. Rushakoff RJ, Sullivan MM, MacMaster HW, et al. Association between a virtual glucose management service and glycemic control in hospitalized adult patients: an observational study. Ann Intern Med 2017;166:621–627.
18. Magee MF, Baker KM, Bardsley JK, Wesley D, Smith KM. Diabetes to go-inpatient: pragmatic lessons learned from implementation of technology-enabled diabetes survival skills education within nursing unit workflow in an urban, tertiary care hospital. Jt Comm J Qual Patient Saf 2021;47:107–119.
19. Pinkhasova D, Swami JB, Patel N, et al. Patient understanding of discharge instructions for home diabetes self-management and risk for.

---

# Diabetes Care in the Hospital

# References

1. Flory JH, Aleman JO, Furst J, Seley JJ. Basal insulin use in the non-critical care setting: is fasting hypoglycemia inevitable or preventable? Endocr Pract 2021;27:561–566
2. Society of Hospital Medicine. Glycemic control for hospitalists. Accessed 22 August 2024. Available from https://www.hospitalmedicine.org/clinical-topics/glycemic-control/
3. Arnold P, Scheurer D, Dake AW, et al. Hospital guidelines for diabetes management and the Joint Commission-American Diabetes Association Inpatient Diabetes Certification. Am J Med Sci 2016;351:333–341
4. Association of British Diabetologists. Joint British Diabetes Societies (JBDS) for Inpatient Care Group. Accessed 22 August 2024. Available from https://abcd.care/jbds-ip
5. U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Testing for diabetes. Accessed 23 August 2024. Available from https://www.cdc.gov/diabetes/diabetes-testing/index.html
6. Agiostratidou G, Anhalt H, Ball D, et al. Standardizing clinically meaningful outcome measures beyond HbA1c for type 1 diabetes: a consensus report of the American Association of Clinical Endocrinologists, the American Association of Diabetes Educators, the American Diabetes Association, the Endocrine Society, JDRF International, The Leona M. and Harry B. Helmsley Charitable Trust, the Pediatric Endocrine Society, and the T1D Exchange. Diabetes Care 2017;40:1622–1630
7. Cardona S, Gomez PC, Vellanki P, et al. Clinical characteristics and outcomes of symptomatic and asymptomatic hypoglycemia in hospitalized patients with diabetes. BMJ Open Diabetes Res Care 2018;6:e000607
8. Van den Berghe G, Wouters P, Weekers F, et al. Intensive insulin therapy in critically ill patients. N Engl J Med 2001;345:1359–1367
9. Umpierrez GE. Glucose control in the ICU. N Engl J Med 2023;389:1234–1237
10. Gunst J, Debaveye Y, Guiza F, et al.; TGC-Fast Collaborators. Tight blood-glucose control without early parenteral nutrition in the ICU. N Engl J Med 2023;389:1180–1190
11. Finfer S, Chittock DR, Su SY-S, et al.; NICE-SUGAR Study Investigators. Intensive versus conventional glucose control in critically ill patients. N Engl J Med 2009;360:1283–1297
12. Sathya B, Davis R, Taveira T, Whitlatch H, Wu W-C. Intensity of peri-operative glycemic control and postoperative outcomes in patients with diabetes: a meta-analysis. Diabetes Res Clin Pract 2013;102:8–15
13. Umpierrez G, Cardona S, Pasquel F, et al. Randomized controlled trial of intensive versus conservative glucose control in patients undergoing coronary artery bypass graft surgery: GLUCO-CABG trial. Diabetes Care 2015;38:1665–1672
14. Furnary AP, Wu Y, Bookin SO. Effect of hyperglycemia and continuous intravenous insulin infusions on outcomes of cardiac surgical procedures: the Portland Diabetic Project. Endocr Pract 2004;10(Suppl. 2):21–33
15. Magaji V, Nayak S, Donihi AC, et al. Comparison of insulin infusion protocols targeting 110-140 mg/dL in patients after cardiac surgery. Diabetes Technol Ther 2012;14:1013–1017
16. Korytkowski MT, Muniyappa R, Antinori-Lent K, et al. Management of hyperglycemia in hospitalized adult patients in non-critical care settings: an Endocrine Society clinical practice guideline. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2022;107:2101–2128
17. Umpierrez GE, Smiley D, Jacobs S, et al. Randomized study of basal-bolus insulin therapy in the inpatient management of patients with type 2 diabetes undergoing general surgery (RABBIT 2 surgery). Diabetes Care 2011;34:256–261
18. Galindo RJ, Aleppo G, Klonoff DC, et al. Implementation of continuous glucose monitoring in the hospital: emergent considerations for remote glucose monitoring during the COVID-19 pandemic. J Diabetes Sci Technol 2020;14:822–832
19. Longo RR, Elias H, Khan M, Seley JJ. Use and accuracy of inpatient CGM during the COVID-19 pandemic: an observational study of general medicine and ICU patients. J Diabetes Sci Technol 2022;16:1136–1143
20. Davis GM, Spanakis EK, Migdal AL, et al. Accuracy of Dexcom G6 continuous glucose monitoring in non-critically ill hospitalized patients with diabetes. Diabetes Care 2021;44:1641–1646
21. Bellido V, Freckman G, Perez A, Galindo RJ. Accuracy and potential interferences of continuous glucose monitoring sensors in the hospital. Endocr Pract 2023;29:919–927
22. Pasquel FJ, Lansang MC, Dhatariya K, Umpierrez GE. Management of diabetes and hyperglycaemia in the hospital. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol 2021;9:174–188
23. Avari P, Lumb A, Flanagan D, et al. Continuous glucose monitoring within hospital: a scoping review and summary of guidelines from the Joint British Diabetes Societies for Inpatient Care. J Diabetes Sci Technol 2023;17:611–624
24. Braithwaite SS, Clark LP, Idrees T, Qureshi F, Soetan OT. Hypoglycemia prevention by algorithm design during intravenous insulin infusion. Curr Diab Rep 2018;18:26
25. Dhatariya KK, Glaser NS, Codner E, Umpierrez GE. Diabetic ketoacidosis. Nat Rev Dis Primers 2020;6:40
26. Anis TR, Boudreau M, Thornton T. Comparing the efficacy of a nurse-driven and a physician-driven diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA) treatment protocol. Clin Pharmacol 2021;13:197–202
27. Rao P, Jiang S-F, Kipnis P, et al. Evaluation of outcomes following hospital-wide implementation of a subcutaneous insulin protocol for diabetic ketoacidosis. JAMA Netw Open 2022;5:e226417
28. Veronesi G, Poerio CS, Braus A, et al. Determinants of nurse satisfaction using insulin pen devices with safety needles: an exploratory factor analysis. Clin Diabetes Endocrinol 2015;1:15
29. Institute for Safe Medication Practices. ISMP Guidelines for Optimizing Safe Subcutaneous Insulin Use in Adults. 2017. Accessed 22 August 2024. Available from https://www.ismp.org/sites/default/files/attachments/2018-09/ISMP138D-Insulin%20Guideline-090718.pdf
30. Najmi U, Haque WZ, Ansari U, et al. Inpatient insulin pen implementation, waste, and potential cost savings: a community hospital experience. J Diabetes Sci Technol 2021;15:741–747
31. Bellido V, Suarez L, Rodriguez MG, et al. Comparison of basal-bolus and premixed insulin regimens in hospitalized patients with type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Care 2015;38:2211–2216
32. Galindo RJ, Pasquel FJ, Vellanki P, et al. Degludec hospital trial: a randomized controlled trial comparing insulin degludec U100 and glargine U100 for the inpatient management of patients.

---

# Diabetes Care in the Hospital

# Diabetes Care Volume 48, Supplement 1, January 2025

with type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Obes Metab 2022; 24:42–49

65. Pasquel FJ, Lansang MC, Khowaja A, et al. A randomized controlled trial comparing glargine U300 and glargine U100 for the inpatient management of medicine and surgery patients with type 2 diabetes: glargine U300 hospital trial. Diabetes Care 2020;43:1242–1248

66. Perez A, Carrasco-Sanchez FJ, Gonzalez C, et al. Efficacy and safety of insulin glargine 300 U/mL (Gla-300) during hospitalization and therapy intensification at discharge in patients with insufficiently controlled type 2 diabetes: results of the phase IV COBALTA trial. BMJ Open Diabetes Res Care 2020;8:e001518

67. Mendez CE, Umpierrez GE. Management of Type 1 Diabetes in the Hospital Setting. Curr Diab Rep 2017;17:98

68. Baldwin D, Zander J, Munoz C, et al. A randomized trial of two weight-based doses of insulin glargine and glulisine in hospitalized subjects with type 2 diabetes and renal insufficiency. Diabetes Care 2012;35:1970–1974

69. Iyengar R, Franzese J, Gianchandani R. Inpatient glycemic management in the setting of renal insufficiency/failure/dialysis. Curr Diab Rep 2018;18:75

70. Umpierrez GE, Davis GM, ElSayed NA, et al. Hyperglycemic crises in adults with diabetes: a consensus report. Diabetes Care 2024;47:1257–1275

71. Kreider KE, Lien LF. Transitioning safely from intravenous to subcutaneous insulin. Curr Diab Rep 2015;15:23

72. Thammakosol K, Sriphrapradang C. Effectiveness and safety of early insulin glargine administration in combination with continuous intravenous insulin infusion in the management of diabetic ketoacidosis: a randomized controlled trial. Diabetes Obes Metab 2023;25:815–822

73. Hsia E, Seggelke S, Gibbs J, et al. Subcutaneous administration of glargine to diabetic patients receiving insulin infusion prevents rebound hyperglycemia. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2012; 97:3132–3137

74. Lim Y, Ohn JH, Jeong J, et al. Effect of the concomitant use of subcutaneous basal insulin and intravenous insulin infusion in the treatment of severe hyperglycemic patients. Endocrinol Metab (Seoul) 2022;37:444–454

75. Tripathy PR, Lansang MC. U-500 regular insulin use in hospitalized patients. Endocr Pract 2015;21:54–58

76. Umpierrez GE, Gianchandani R, Smiley D, et al. Safety and efficacy of sitagliptin therapy for the inpatient management of general medicine and surgery patients with type 2 diabetes: a pilot, randomized, controlled study. Diabetes Care 2013;36:3430–3435

77. Fushimi N, Shibuya T, Yoshida Y, Ito S, Hachiya H, Mori A. Dulaglutide-combined basal plus correction insulin therapy contributes to ideal glycemic control in non-critical hospitalized patients. J Diabetes Investig 2020;11:125–131

78. Fayfman M, Galindo RJ, Rubin DJ, et al. A randomized controlled trial on the safety and efficacy of exenatide therapy for the inpatient management of general medicine and surgery patients with type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Care 2019;42:450–456

79. Perez-Belmonte LM, Osuna-Sanchez J, Millan-Gomez M, et al. Glycaemic efficacy and safety of linagliptin for the management of non-cardiac surgery patients with type 2 diabetes in a real-world setting: Lina-Surg study. Ann Med 2019;51:252–261

80. Vellanki P, Rasouli N, Baldwin D, et al.; Linagliptin Inpatient Research Group. Glycaemic efficacy and safety of linagliptin compared to a basal-bolus insulin regimen in patients with type 2 diabetes undergoing non-cardiac surgery: a multicentre randomized clinical trial. Diabetes Obes Metab 2019;21:837–843

81. Pasquel FJ, Gianchandani R, Rubin DJ, et al. Efficacy of sitagliptin for the hospital management of general medicine and surgery patients with type 2 diabetes (Sita-Hospital): a multicentre, prospective, open-label, non-inferiority randomized trial. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol 2017;5:125–133

82. U.S. Food and Drug Administration. FDA Drug Safety Communication: FDA adds warnings about heart failure risk to labels of type 2 diabetes medicines containing saxagliptin and alogliptin. Accessed 22 August 2024. Available from https://www.fda.gov/Drugs/DrugSafety/ucm486096.htm

83. Kosiborod MN, Angermann CE, Collins SP, et al. Effects of empagliflozin on symptoms, physical limitations, and quality of life in patients hospitalized for acute heart failure: results from the EMPULSE trial. Circulation 2022;146:279–288

84. Tamaki S, Yamada T, Watanabe T, et al. Effect of empagliflozin as an add-on therapy on decongestion and renal function in patients with diabetes hospitalized for acute decompensated heart failure: a prospective randomized controlled study. Circ Heart Fail 2021;14:e007048

85. Cunningham JW, Vaduganathan M, Claggett BL, et al. Dapagliflozin in patients recently hospitalized with heart failure and mildly reduced or preserved ejection fraction. J Am Coll Cardiol 2022;80:1302–1310

86. Salah HM, Al’Aref SJ, Khan MS, et al. Efficacy and safety of sodium-glucose cotransporter 2 inhibitors initiation in patients with acute heart failure, with and without type 2 diabetes: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Cardiovasc Diabetol 2022;21:20

87. Voors AA, Angermann CE, Teerlink JR, et al. The SGLT2 inhibitor empagliflozin in patients hospitalized for acute heart failure: a multinational randomized trial. Nat Med 2022;28:568–574

88. Jhund PS, Ponikowski P, Docherty KF, et al. Dapagliflozin and recurrent heart failure hospitalizations in heart failure with reduced ejection fraction: an analysis of DAPA-HF. Circulation 2021;143:1962–1972

89. U.S. Food and Drug Administration. FDA revises labels of SGLT2 inhibitors for diabetes to include warnings about too much acid in the blood and serious urinary tract infections. Accessed 22 August 2024. Available from https://www.fda.gov/drugs/drug-safety-and-availability/fda-revises-labels-sglt2-inhibitors-diabetes-include-warnings-about-too-much-acid-blood-and-serious

90. Lake A, Arthur A, Byrne C, Davenport K, Yamamoto JM, Murphy HR. The effect of hypoglycaemia during hospital admission on health-related outcomes for people with diabetes: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Diabet Med 2019;36:1349–1359

91. Garg R, Hurwitz S, Turchin A, Trivedi A. Hypoglycemia, with or without insulin therapy, is associated with increased mortality among hospitalized patients with diabetes. Endocr Pract 2014;20:1051–1056

92. Ilcewicz HN, Hennessey EK, Smith CB. Evaluation of the impact of an inpatient hyperglycemia protocol on glycemic control. J Pharm Pharm Sci 2019;22:85–92

93. Sinha Gregory N, Seley JJ, Gerber LM, Tang C, Brillon D. Decreased rates of hypoglycemia following implementation of a comprehensive computerized insulin order set and titration algorithm in the inpatient setting. Hosp Pract (1995) 2016;44:260–265

94. Moghissi ES, Korytkowski MT, DiNardo M, et al.; American Association of Clinical Endocrinologists; American Diabetes Association. American Association of Clinical Endocrinologists and American Diabetes Association consensus statement on inpatient glycemic control. Diabetes Care 2009;32:1119–1131

95. Akirov A, Grossman A, Shochat T, Shimon I. Mortality among hospitalized patients with hypoglycemia: insulin related and noninsulin related. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2017;102:416–424

96. Amori RE, Pittas AG, Siegel RD, et al. Inpatient medical errors involving glucose-lowering medications and their impact on patients: review of 2,598 incidents from a voluntary electronic error-reporting database. Endocr Pract 2008;14:535–542

97. Alwan D, Chipps E, Yen P-Y, Dungan K. Evaluation of the timing and coordination of prandial insulin administration in the hospital. Diabetes Res Clin Pract 2017;131:18–32

98. Hung AM, Siew ED, Wilson OD, et al. Risk of hypoglycemia following hospital discharge in patients with diabetes and acute kidney injury. Diabetes Care 2018;41:503–512

99. Maynard G, Kulasa K, Ramos P, et al. Impact of a hypoglycemia reduction bundle and a systems approach to inpatient glycemic management. Endocr Pract 2015;21:355–367

100. Milligan PE, Bocox MC, Pratt E, Hoehner CM, Krettek JE, Dunagan WC. Multifaceted approach to reducing occurrence of severe hypoglycemia in a large healthcare system. Am J Health Syst Pharm 2015;72:1631–1641

101. Umpierrez G, Korytkowski M. Diabetic emergencies - ketoacidosis, hyperglycaemic hyperosmolar state and hypoglycaemia. Nat Rev Endocrinol 2016;12:222–232

102. Rickels MR. Hypoglycemia-associated autonomic failure, counterregulatory responses, and therapeutic options in type 1 diabetes. Ann N Y Acad Sci 2019;1454:68–79

103. Dendy JA, Chockalingam V, Tirumalasetty NN, et al. Identifying risk factors for severe hypoglycemia in hospitalized patients with diabetes. Endocr Pract 2014;20:1051–1056

104. Ulmer BJ, Kara A, Mariash CN. Temporal occurrences and recurrence patterns of hypoglycemia during hospitalization. Endocr Pract 2015;21:501–507

105. Shah BR, Walji S, Kiss A, James JE, Lowe JM. Derivation and validation of a risk-prediction tool for hypoglycemia in hospitalized adults with diabetes: the Hypoglycemia During Hospitalization (HyDHo) score. Can J Diabetes 2019;43:278–282.e1

Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/48/Supplement_1/S321/791476/dc25s016.pdf by guest on 16 December 2024

---

# Diabetes Care in the Hospital

S333

1. Curll M, Dinardo M, Noschese M, Korytkowski MT. Menu selection, glycaemic control and satisfaction with standard and patient-controlled subcutaneous insulin and continuous insulin infusion in managing adult patients with diabetic ketoacidosis. BMC Endocr Disord 2024;24:133
2. Khowaja A, Alkhaddo JB, Rana Z, Fish L. Glycemic control in hospitalized patients with diabetes receiving corticosteroids using a neutral protamine Hagedorn insulin protocol: a randomized clinical trial. Diabetes Ther 2018;9:1647–1655
3. Kwon S, Hermayer KL, Hermayer K. Glucocorticoid-induced hyperglycemia. Am J Med Sci 2013;345:274–277
4. Brady V, Thosani S, Zhou S, Bassett R, Busaidy NL, Lavis V. Safe and effective dosing of basal-bolus insulin in patients receiving high-dose steroids for hyper-cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, and dexamethasone chemotherapy. Diabetes Technol Ther 2014;16:874–879
5. Mabrey ME, Setji TL. Patient self-management of diabetes care in the inpatient setting: Pro. J Diabetes Sci Technol 2015;9:1152–1154
6. Shah AD, Rushakoff RJ. Patient self-management of diabetes care in the inpatient setting: con. J Diabetes Sci Technol 2015;9:1155–1157
7. Flanagan D, Dhatariya K; Joint British Diabetes Societies (JBDS) for Inpatient Care writing group. Self-management of diabetes in hospital: a guideline from the Joint British Diabetes Societies (JBDS) for Inpatient Care group. Diabet Med 2018;35:992–996
8. Umpierrez GE, Klonoff DC. Diabetes technology update: use of insulin pumps and continuous glucose monitoring in the hospital. Diabetes Care 2018;41:1579–1589
9. Korytkowski MT, Salata RJ, Koerbel GL, et al. Insulin therapy and glycemic control in hospitalized patients with diabetes during enteral nutrition therapy: a randomized controlled clinical trial. Diabetes Care 2009;32:594–596
10. Hsia E, Seggelke SA, Gibbs J, Rasouli N, Draznin B. Comparison of 70/30 biphasic insulin with glargine/lispro regimen in non-critically ill diabetic patients on continuous enteral nutrition therapy. Nutr Clin Pract 2011;26:714–717
11. Olveira G, Abu n J, Lopez R, et al. Regular insulin added to total parenteral nutrition vs subcutaneous glargine in non-critically ill diabetic inpatients, a multicenter randomized clinical trial: INSUPAR trial. Clin Nutr 2020;39:388–394
12. Aberer F, Hochfellner DA, Sourij H, Mader JK. A practical guide for the management of steroid induced hyperglycaemia in the hospital. J Clin Med 2021;10
13. Bajaj MA, Zale AD, Morgenlander WR, Abusamaan MS, Mathioudakis N. Insulin dosing and glycemic outcomes among steroid-treated hospitalized patients. Endocr Pract 2022;28:774–779
14. Kleinhans M, Albrecht LJ, Benson S, Fuhrer D, Dissemond J, Tan S. Continuous glucose monitoring of steroid-induced hyperglycemia in patients with dermatologic diseases. J Diabetes Sci Technol 2024;18:904–910
15. Roberts A, James J; Joint British Diabetes Societies (JBDS) for Inpatient Care. Management of hyperglycaemia and steroid (glucocorticoid) therapy: a guideline from the Joint British Diabetes Societies (JBDS) for Inpatient Care group. Diabet Med 2018;35:1011–1017
16. Burt MG, Roberts GW, Aguilar-Loza NR, Frith P, Stranks SN. Continuous monitoring of circadian glycemic patterns in patients receiving prednisolone for COPD. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2011;96:1789–1796
17. Harrison VS, Rustico S, Palladino AA, Ferrara C, Hawkes CP. Glargine co-administration with intravenous insulin in pediatric diabetic ketoacidosis is safe and facilitates transition to a subcutaneous regimen. Pediatr Diabetes 2017;18:742–748
18. Vellanki P, Umpierrez GE. Diabetic ketoacidosis: a common debut of diabetes among African Americans with type 2 diabetes. Endocr Pract 2017;23:971–978
19. Shomali ME, Herr DL, Hill PC, Pehlivanova M, Sharretts JM, Magee MF. Conversion from intravenous insulin to subcutaneous insulin after cardiovascular surgery: transition to target study. Diabetes Technol Ther 2011;13:121–126
20. Hirschman KB, Bixby MB. Transitions in care from the hospital to home for patients with diabetes. Diabetes Spectr 2014;27:192–195
21. Herges JR, Galindo RJ, Neumiller JJ, Heien HC, Umpierrez GE, McCoy RG. Glucagon prescribing and costs among U.S. adults with diabetes, 2011-2021. Diabetes Care 2023;46:620–627

---

# Diabetes Care in the Hospital

# Diabetes Care

# Volume 48, Supplement 1, January 2025

1. Galindo RJ, Inselman SA, Umpierrez GE, et al. National trends in glucagon prescriptions among U.S. adults with diabetes and end-stage kidney disease treated by dialysis: 2013-2017. Diabetes Care 2023;46:e130–e132
2. de Boer IH, Khunti K, Sadusky T, et al. Diabetes management in chronic kidney disease: a consensus report by the American Diabetes Association (ADA) and Kidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes (KDIGO). Diabetes Care 2022;45:3075–3090
3. Roussel R, Riveline J-P, Vicaut E, et al. Important drop in rate of acute diabetes complications in people with type 1 or type 2 diabetes after initiation of flash glucose monitoring in France: the RELIEF study. Diabetes Care 2021;44:1368–1376

Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/48/Supplement_1/S321/791476/dc25s016.pdf by guest on 16 December 2024

---

