# Diabetes Care

# Volume 48, Supplement 1, January 2025

# 11. Chronic Kidney Disease and Risk Management: Standards of Care in Diabetes—2025

Diabetes Care 2025;48(Suppl. 1):S239–S251 | https://doi.org/10.2337/dc25-S011

Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/48/Supplement_1/S239/791464/dc25s011.pdf by guest on 16 December 2024

# 11. CHRONIC KIDNEY DISEASE

# Screening Recommendations

- 11.1a Assess kidney function (i.e., spot urine albumin-to-creatinine ratio [UACR]) and estimated glomerular filtration rate [eGFR] in people with type 1 diabetes with duration of ≥5 years and in all people with type 2 diabetes regardless of treatment. B
- 11.1b In people with established chronic kidney disease (CKD), monitor urinary albumin (e.g., spot UACR) and eGFR 1–4 times per year depending on the stage of the kidney disease (Fig. 11.1). B

# Treatment Recommendations

- 11.2 Optimize glucose management to reduce the risk or slow the progression of CKD (Fig. 9.3). A
- 11.3 Optimize blood pressure management (aim for <130/80 mmHg [Fig. 10.2]) and reduce blood pressure variability to reduce the risk or slow the progression of CKD and reduce cardiovascular risk. A
- 11.4a In nonpregnant people with diabetes and hypertension, either an ACE inhibitor or an angiotensin receptor blocker (ARB) is recommended for those with moderately increased albuminuria (UACR 30–299 mg/g creatinine) B and is strongly recommended for those with severely increased albuminuria (UACR).

*A complete list of members of the American Diabetes Association Professional Practice Committee can be found at https://doi.org/10.2337/dc25-SINT. Duality of interest information for each author is available at https://doi.org/10.2337/dc25-SDIS.

Suggested citation: American Diabetes Association Professional Practice Committee. 11. Chronic kidney disease and risk management: Standards of Care in Diabetes—2025. Diabetes Care 2025; 48(Suppl. 1):S239–S251

© 2024 by the American Diabetes Association. Readers may use this article as long as the work is properly cited, the use is educational and not for profit, and the work is not altered. More information is available at https://www.diabetesjournals.org/journals/pages/license.

---

# Chronic Kidney Disease and Risk Management

# Diabetes Care Volume 48, Supplement 1, January 2025

Downloaded from diabetesjournals.org by guest on 16 December 2024

# Figure 11.1—Risk of CKD progression, cardiovascular disease risk, and mortality; frequency of visits; and referral to nephrology according to GFR and albuminuria.

The numbers in the boxes are a guide to the frequency of screening or monitoring (number of times per year). Green reflects no evidence of CKD by estimated GFR or albuminuria, with screening indicated once per year. For monitoring of prevalent CKD, suggested monitoring varies from once per year (yellow) to four times or more per year (i.e., every 1–3 months [deep red]) according to risks of CKD progression and CKD complications (e.g., cardiovascular disease, anemia, and hyperparathyroidism). These are general parameters based only on expert opinion and underlying comorbid conditions, and disease state must be taken into account, as should the likelihood of impacting a change in management for any individual. CKD, chronic kidney disease; GFR, glomerular filtration rate. Adapted from de Boer et al. (1).

# 11.4 Management Recommendations

11.4a For people with type 2 diabetes and CKD, use of a sodium–glucose co-transporter 2 (SGLT2) inhibitor with demonstrated benefit is recommended to reduce CKD progression and cardiovascular events. A

11.4b Monitor for increased serum creatinine and for increased serum potassium levels when ACE inhibitors, ARBs, and mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists (MRAs) are used, or for hypokalemia when diuretics are used at routine visits and 7–14 days after initiation or after a dose change. B

11.4c An ACE inhibitor or an ARB is not recommended for the primary prevention of CKD in people with diabetes who have normal blood pressure, normal UACR (<30 mg/g creatinine), and normal eGFR. A

11.4d Continue renin-angiotensin system blockade for mild to moderate increases in serum creatinine (#30%) in individuals who have no signs of extracellular fluid volume depletion. A

# 11.5 Cardiovascular Risk Reduction

11.5a Aim to reduce urinary albumin by $30% in people with CKD and albuminuria $300 mg/g to slow CKD progression. B

11.5b To reduce cardiovascular risk and kidney disease progression in people with type 2 diabetes and CKD, a glucagon-like peptide 1 agonist with demonstrated benefit in this population is recommended. A

11.5c To reduce cardiovascular events and CKD progression in people with CKD and albuminuria, a nonsteroidal MRA that has been shown to be effective in clinical trials is recommended (if eGFR is $25 mL/min/1.73 m2). Potassium levels should be monitored. A

# 11.6 Antihypertensive Medications

11.6 Potentially harmful antihypertensive medications in pregnancy should be avoided in sexually active individuals of childbearing potential who are not using reliable contraception and, if used, should be switched prior to conception to antihypertensive medications considered safer during pregnancy. B

# 11.7 Referral to Nephrology

11.7 Individuals should be referred for evaluation by a nephrologist if they have continuously increasing urinary albumin levels and/or continuously decreasing eGFR and/or if the eGFR is <30 mL/min/1.73 m2. A

---

# Chronic Kidney Disease and Risk Management

# DIAGNOSIS OF CHRONIC KIDNEY DISEASE IN PEOPLE WITH DIABETES

CKD in people with diabetes is usually a clinical diagnosis made based on the presence of albuminuria and/or reduced eGFR in the absence of signs or symptoms of other primary causes of kidney damage. The typical presentation of CKD in people with diabetes is considered to include long-standing duration of diabetes, retinopathy, albuminuria without gross hematuria, and gradually progressive loss of eGFR. However, signs of CKD may be present at diagnosis or without retinopathy in type 2 diabetes. Reduced eGFR without albuminuria has been frequently reported in type 1 and type 2 diabetes and is becoming more common over time as the prevalence of diabetes increases in the U.S. An active urinary sediment (containing red or white blood cells or cellular casts), rapidly increasing albuminuria or total proteinuria, the presence of nephrotic syndrome, rapidly decreasing eGFR, or the absence of retinopathy (in type 1 diabetes) suggests alternative or additional causes of kidney disease. For individuals with these features, referral to a nephrologist for further diagnosis, including the possibility of kidney biopsy, should be considered.

# EPIDEMIOLOGY OF DIABETES AND CHRONIC KIDNEY DISEASE

Chronic kidney disease (CKD) is diagnosed by the persistent elevation of urinary albumin excretion (albuminuria), low estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR), or other manifestations of kidney damage. In this section, the focus is on CKD attributed to diabetes in adults, which occurs in 20–40% of people with diabetes. CKD in people with diabetes typically develops after a duration of 10 years in type 1 diabetes but may be present at diagnosis of type 2 diabetes. CKD can progress to kidney failure requiring dialysis or kidney transplantation and is the leading cause of end-stage kidney disease (ESKD) in the U.S. In addition, among people with type 1 or type 2 diabetes, the presence of CKD markedly increases cardiovascular risk and healthcare costs.

# ASSESSMENT OF ALBUMINURIA AND ESTIMATED GLOMERULAR FILTRATION RATE

Screening for albuminuria can be most easily performed by urine albumin-to-creatinine ratio (UACR) in a random spot urine collection. Timed or 24-h collections are more burdensome and add little to prediction or accuracy. Measurement of a spot urine sample for albumin alone without simultaneously measuring urine creatinine is less expensive but susceptible to false-negative and false-positive determinations as a result of variation in urine concentration due to hydration. Thus, semiquantitative or qualitative (dipstick) screening will need to be confirmed by UACR values in an accredited laboratory. Hence, it is better to simply collect a spot urine sample for UACR.

# STAGING OF CHRONIC KIDNEY DISEASE

Stage G1 and stage G2 CKD are defined by evidence of high albuminuria with eGFR ≥60 mL/min/1.73 m², and stages G3-G5 CKD are defined by progressively lower ranges of eGFR. At any eGFR, the degree of albuminuria is...

---

# Chronic Kidney Disease and Risk Management

# Diabetes Care Volume 48, Supplement 1, January 2025

# Table 11.1—Reasons to consider nondiabetic kidney diseases in a person with chronic kidney disease and diabetes

- Type 1 diabetes duration &lt;5 years
- Active urine sediment (e.g., containing red blood cells or cellular casts)
- Chronically well-managed blood glucose
- Rapidly declining eGFR
- Rapidly increasing or very high UACR or urine protein/creatinine level
- No retinopathy in a person with type 1 diabetes

Information adapted from Liang et al. (129). eGFR, estimated glomerular filtration rate; UACR, urine albumin-to-creatinine ratio.

Serum potassium should also be monitored in individuals treated with diuretics because these medications can cause hypokalemia, which is associated with cardiovascular risk and mortality (38–40). Individuals with eGFR &lt;60 mL/min/1.73 m2 receiving ACE inhibitors, ARBs, or MRAs should have serum potassium measured periodically. Additionally, people with this lower range of eGFR should have their medication dosing verified, their exposure to nephrotoxins (e.g., nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs and iodinated contrast) should be minimized, and they should be evaluated for potential CKD complications (Table 11.2).

There is a clear need for annual quantitative assessment of UACR. This is especially true after a diagnosis of albuminuria, institution of ACE inhibitors or ARB therapy to maximum tolerated doses, and achievement of blood pressure goals. Early changes in kidney function may be detected by increases in albuminuria before changes in eGFR (41), and this also significantly affects cardiovascular risk. Continued surveillance can assess both response to therapy and disease progression and may aid in assessing participation in ACE inhibitor or ARB therapy. In addition, in clinical trials of ACE inhibitor or ARB therapy in people with type 2 diabetes, reducing albuminuria to levels &lt;300 mg/g creatinine or by &gt;30% from baseline has been associated with improved kidney and cardiovascular outcomes, leading to the recommendation that medications should be titrated to maximize reduction in UACR (8). See Table 11.3 for interventions that lower albuminuria.

Data from post hoc analyses demonstrate less benefit on cardiorenal outcomes at half doses of RAS blockade (42). In type 1 diabetes, remission of albuminuria may occur spontaneously, and cohort studies evaluating associations of change in albuminuria with clinical outcomes have reported inconsistent results (43,44).

# ACUTE KIDNEY INJURY

Acute kidney injury (AKI) is diagnosed by a sustained increase in serum creatinine over a short period of time, which is also reflected as a rapid decrease in eGFR (26,27). People with diabetes are at higher risk of AKI than those without diabetes (28). Other risk factors for AKI include preexisting CKD, the use of medications that cause kidney injury (e.g., nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs), certain intravenous dyes (e.g., iodinated radiocontrast agents) and the use of medications that alter renal blood flow and intrarenal hemodynamics. In particular, many antihypertensive medications (e.g., diuretics, ACE inhibitors, and angiotensin receptor blockers [ARBs]) can reduce intravascular volume, renal blood flow, and/or glomerular filtration.

# SURVEILLANCE

Both albuminuria and eGFR should be monitored annually to enable timely diagnosis of CKD, monitor progression of CKD, detect superimposed kidney diseases including AKI, assess risk of CKD complications, dose medications appropriately, and determine whether nephrology referral is needed. Among people with existing CKD, screening for complications of CKD is indicated (Table 11.2). Early vaccination against hepatitis B virus is indicated in individuals likely to progress to ESKD.

Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/48/Supplement_1/S239/791464/dc25s011.pdf by guest on 16 December 2024

---

diabetesjournals.org/care                                                                                          Chronic Kidney Disease and Risk Management  S243

Table 11.2—Screening for selected complications of chronic kidney disease
Complication | Physical and laboratory evaluation
--- | ---
Blood pressure >130/80 mmHg | Blood pressure, weight, BMI
Volume overload | History, physical examination, weight
Electrolyte abnormalities | Serum electrolytes
Metabolic acidosis | Serum electrolytes
Anemia | Hemoglobin; iron, iron saturation, ferritin testing if indicated
Metabolic bone disease | Serum calcium, phosphate, PTH, vitamin 25(OH)D

Complications of chronic kidney disease (CKD) generally become prevalent when estimated glomerular filtration rate falls below 60 mL/min/1.73 m2 (stage G3 CKD or greater) and become more common and severe as CKD progresses. Evaluation of elevated blood pressure and volume overload should occur at every clinical contact possible; laboratory evaluations are generally indicated every 6–12 months for stage G3 CKD, every 3–5 months for stage G4 CKD, and every 1–3 months for stage G5 CKD, or as indicated to evaluate symptoms or changes in therapy. 25(OH)D, 25-hydroxyvitamin D; PTH, parathyroid hormone.

Comorbidities," for further information on immunization).

Prevention
The only proven primary prevention interventions for CKD in people with diabetes are blood glucose (A1C goal of 7%) and blood pressure management. There is no evidence that renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system inhibitors or any other interventions prevent the development of CKD in the absence of hypertension or albuminuria. Thus, the American Diabetes Association does not recommend routine use of these medications solely for the purpose of prevention of the development of CKD. In 2023, the Glycemia Reduction Approaches in Diabetes: A Comparative Effectiveness Study (GRADE) was published (45). This large prospective study compared liraglutide, sitagliptin, glimeperide, and insulin glargine with respect to achieving and maintaining A1C goals in people with type 2 diabetes treated with metformin monotherapy; kidney and cardiovascular end points were examined as secondary outcomes. A total of 5,047 participants were enrolled from July 2013 to August 2017 and were followed for an average of 5 years. Almost all participants did not have signs of kidney disease at the time of enrollment. No differences between the examined medications were observed, which suggests that there were no unique reno-protective effects among these medications for prevention. Of note, SGLT2 inhibitors were not included in the study, as these medications were not routinely available at the time the study started.

INTERVENTIONS

Nutrition
For people with stages 3–5 non–dialysis-dependent CKD, dietary protein intake should be ~0.8 g/kg body weight per day (the recommended daily allowance) (1). Compared with higher levels of dietary protein intake, this level slowed GFR decline with evidence of a greater effect over time. Higher levels of dietary protein intake (>20% of daily calories from protein or >1.3 g/kg/day) have been associated with increased albuminuria, more rapid kidney function loss, and CVD mortality and therefore should be avoided. Reducing the amount of dietary protein below the recommended daily allowance of 0.8 g/kg/day is not recommended because it does not alter blood glucose levels, cardiovascular risk measures, or the course of GFR decline (46). Some organizations recommend a lower protein intake (0.6–0.8 g/kg/day). In particular, guidelines from the National Kidney Foundation Kidney Disease Outcomes Quality Initiative (NKF KDOQI) (47) and the International Society of Renal Nutrition and Metabolism (48) recommend a lower protein intake level for reno-protection and state that this lower level is relatively safe. However, for CKD in diabetes, the expert grade is "opinion" only. The guidelines note that the evidence for lower protein intake in people with CKD has been published for only those without diabetes, which is graded Level 1A. Low-protein eating patterns should only be followed alongside guidance from a health care professional experienced in managing nutrition for people with CKD.

Restriction of dietary sodium (to <2,300 mg/day) may be useful to manage blood pressure and reduce cardiovascular risk (49,50), and individualization of dietary potassium may be necessary to manage serum potassium concentrations (28,38–40). These interventions may be most important for individuals with reduced eGFR, for whom urinary excretion of sodium and potassium may be impaired. For individuals on dialysis, higher levels of dietary protein intake should be considered since protein-energy wasting is a major problem for some individuals on dialysis (51). Recommendations for dietary sodium and potassium intake should be individualized based on comorbid conditions, medication use, blood pressure, and laboratory data.

Glycemic Goals
Intensive lowering of blood glucose with the goal of achieving near-normoglycemia has been shown in large, randomized studies to delay the onset and progression of albuminuria and reduce eGFR in people with type 1 diabetes (52,53) and type 2 diabetes (1,54–59). Insulin alone was used to lower blood glucose in the Diabetes Control and Complications Trial (DCCT)/Epidemiology of Diabetes Interventions and Complications (EDIC) study of type 1 diabetes, while a variety of agents were used in clinical trials of type 2 diabetes, supporting the conclusion that lowering blood glucose itself helps prevent CKD and its progression. The effects of glucose-lowering therapies on CKD have helped define A1C goals.

Table 11.3—Interventions that lower albuminuria
- Blood glucose management
- Blood pressure management
- Treatment with ACE inhibitors or ARBs
- Smoking cessation
- Weight loss
- Changes in eating patterns (decreased salt intake and/or protein intake)
- Treatment with SGLT2 inhibitors, MRAs, or GLP-1 RAs

ARB, angiotensin receptor blocker; GLP-1 RA, glucagon-like peptide 1 receptor agonist; MRA, mineralocorticoid receptor antagonist.

---

# Chronic Kidney Disease and Risk Management

# Diabetes Care Volume 48, Supplement 1, January 2025

The presence of CKD affects the risks and benefits of intensive lowering of blood glucose and a number of specific glucose-lowering medications. Adverse effects of intensive management of blood glucose levels (hypoglycemia and mortality) were increased among people with kidney disease at baseline. Moreover, there is a lag time of at least 2 years in type 2 diabetes to over 10 years in type 1 diabetes for the effects of intensive glucose control to manifest as improved eGFR outcomes.

# Blood Pressure and Use of ACE Inhibitors and Angiotensin Receptor Blockers

ACE inhibitors and ARBs remain a mainstay of management for people with CKD with albuminuria and for the treatment of hypertension in people with diabetes (with or without CKD in people with diabetes). Indeed, all the trials that evaluated the benefits of SGLT2 inhibition or nonsteroidal MRA effects were done in individuals who were being treated with an ACE inhibitor or ARB, in some trials up to maximum tolerated doses.

Hypertension is a strong risk factor for the development and progression of CKD. Antihypertensive therapy reduces the risk of albuminuria, and among people with type 1 or 2 diabetes with established CKD (eGFR <60 mL/min/1.73 m² and UACR ≥300 mg/g creatinine), ACE inhibitor or ARB therapy reduces the risk of progression to ESKD. Moreover, antihypertensive therapy reduces the risk of cardiovascular events.

# Direct Kidney Effects of Glucose-Lowering Medications

Some glucose-lowering medications also have effects on the kidney that are direct, i.e., not mediated through glycemia. For example, SGLT2 inhibitors reduce renal tubular glucose reabsorption, weight, systemic blood pressure, intraglomerular pressure, and albuminuria and slow GFR loss through mechanisms that appear independent of glycemia. Moreover, recent data support the notion that SGLT2 inhibitors reduce oxidative stress in the kidney.

---

# Chronic Kidney Disease and Risk Management

activity (92–94). Glucagon-like peptide 1 (GLP-1) receptor agonists (RAs) have also been shown to improve kidney outcomes (95–100). Kidney effects should be considered when selecting agents for glucose lowering (see Section 9, “Pharmacologic Approaches to Glycemic Treatment”).

# Selection of Glucose-Lowering Medications for People With Chronic Kidney Disease

For people with type 2 diabetes and established CKD, special considerations for the selection of glucose-lowering medications include limitations to available medications when eGFR is diminished and a desire to mitigate risks of CKD progression, CVD, and hypoglycemia (101,102). Medication dosing may require modification with eGFR <60 mL/min/1.73 m2 (1). The FDA revised its guidance for the use of metformin in CKD in 2016 (103), recommending use of eGFR instead of serum creatinine to guide treatment and expanding the pool of people with kidney disease for whom metformin treatment should be considered. The revised FDA guidance states that 1) metformin is contraindicated in individuals with an eGFR <30 mL/min/1.73 m2, 2) eGFR should be monitored while taking metformin, 3) the benefits and risks of continuing treatment should be reassessed when eGFR falls to <45 mL/min/1.73 m2 (104,105), 4) metformin should not be initiated for individuals with an eGFR <45 mL/min/1.73 m2, and 5) metformin should be temporarily discontinued at the time of or before iodinated contrast imaging procedures in individuals with eGFR 30–60 mL/min/1.73 m2.

SGLT2 inhibitors are recommended for people with eGFR ≥20 mL/min/1.73 m2 and type 2 diabetes, as they slow CKD progression and reduce heart failure risk independent of glucose management (106). GLP-1 RAs are suggested for cardiovascular risk reduction if such risk is a predominant problem, as they reduce risks of CVD events and hypoglycemia and slow progression of CKD (100,107–110).

# Figure 11.2—Holistic approach for improving outcomes in people with diabetes and CKD

Icons presented indicate the following benefits: BP cuff, BP lowering; glucose meter, glucose lowering; heart, cardioprotection; kidney, kidney protection; scale, weight management. eGFR is presented in units of mL/min/1.73 m2. *ACEi or ARB (at maximal tolerated doses) should be first-line therapy for hypertension when albuminuria is present. Otherwise, dihydropyridine calcium channel blocker or diuretic can also be considered; all three classes are often needed to attain BP targets. †Finerenone is currently the only ns-MRA with proven clinical kidney and cardiovascular benefits. ‡Semaglutide can be used as another first-line agent for people with CKD. ACEi, angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor; ACR, albumin-to creatinine ratio; ARB, angiotensin receptor blocker; ASCVD, atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease; BP, blood pressure; CCB, calcium channel blocker; CVD, cardiovascular disease; eGFR, estimated glomerular filtration rate; GLP-1 RA, glucagon-like peptide 1 receptor agonist; HTN, hypertension; MRA, mineralocorticoid receptor antagonist; ns-MRA, nonsteroidal mineralocorticoid receptor antagonist; PCSK9i, proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type 9 inhibitor; RAS, renin-angiotensin system; SGLT2i, sodium–glucose cotransporter 2 inhibitor; T1D, type 1 diabetes; T2D, type 2 diabetes. Adapted from de Boer et al. (1).

---

# Chronic Kidney Disease and Risk Management

# Diabetes Care Volume 48, Supplement 1, January 2025

at high risk for CVD or with existing CVD assessment, doubling from the baseline serum creatinine average sustained for $30 days by central laboratory assessment, or with kidney disease with an eGFR of at least 20 but less than 45 mL/min/1.73 m2 or who had an eGFR of at least 45 but less than 90 mL/min/1.73 m2 with a UACR of at least 200 mg/g creatinine. Approximately one-half of the 6,609 participants had diabetes. The empagliflozin-treated participants had lower risk of progression of kidney disease and lower risk of death from cardiovascular causes (HR 0.72 [95% CI 0.64–0.82]; P &lt; 0.001).

Other Long-term Outcomes With Semaglutide in Subjects With Type 2 Diabetes (91,95,98,111). Specifically, compared with placebo, empagliflozin reduced the risk of incident or worsening nephropathy (a composite of progression to UACR >300 mg/g creatinine, doubling of serum creatinine, ESKD, or death from ESKD) by 39% and the risk of doubling of serum creatinine accompanied by eGFR &lt;45 mL/min/1.73 m2 by 44%; canagliflozin reduced the risk of progression of albuminuria by 27% and the risk of reduction in eGFR, ESKD, or death from ESKD by 40%; liraglutide reduced the risk of new or worsening nephropathy (a composite of persistent macroalbuminuria, doubling of serum creatinine, ESKD, or death from ESKD) by 22%; and semaglutide reduced the risk of new or worsening nephropathy (a composite of persistent UACR >300 mg/g creatinine, doubling of serum creatinine, or ESKD) by 36% (each P &lt; 0.01).

These analyses were limited by evaluation of study populations not selected primarily for CKD and examination of kidney effects as secondary outcomes.

Three large clinical trials of SGLT2 inhibitors have focused on people with CKD and assessment of primary kidney outcomes. Canagliflozin and Renal Events in Diabetes with Established Nephropathy Clinical Evaluation (CREDENCE), a placebo-controlled trial of canagliflozin among 4,401 adults with type 2 diabetes, UACR ≥300–5,000 mg/g creatinine, and eGFR range 30–90 mL/min/1.73 m2 (mean eGFR 56 mL/min/1.73 m2 with a mean albuminuria level of >900 mg/day), had a primary composite end point of ESKD, doubling of serum creatinine, or renal or cardiovascular death (29,112). It was stopped early due to positive efficacy and showed a 32% risk reduction for development of ESKD over control (29).

Additionally, the development of the primary end point, which included dialysis for ≥30 days, kidney transplantation, or eGFR sustained for ≥30 days by central laboratory assessment, was reduced by dapagliflozin for the primary end point (hazard ratio [HR] 0.61 [95% CI 0.51–0.72]; P &lt; 0.001) (114). The HR for the kidney composite of a sustained decline in eGFR of ≥50%, ESKD, or death from renal causes was 0.56 (95% CI 0.45–0.68; P &lt; 0.001). The HR for the composite of death from cardiovascular causes or hospitalization for heart failure was 0.71 (95% CI 0.55–0.92; P = 0.009). Finally, all-cause mortality was decreased in the dapagliflozin group compared with the placebo group (P &lt; 0.004).

The most recently published clinical trial was EMPA-KIDNEY (Study of Heart and Kidney Protection with Empagliflozin) (115). This study enrolled participants with significant kidney disease defined by level of eGFR and/or by level of albuminuria (of note, all participants had an albuminuria level of at least 100 mg/g). The primary outcome was defined as the first major kidney disease event (onset of >50% in eGFR, onset of persistent eGFR of <15 mL/min/1.73 m2, initiation of dialysis or transplant, renal death, and cardiovascular death). The study was stopped early due to reaching a prespecified outcome. There was a 24% lower HR for those taking semaglutide compared with the placebo group.

Of note, cardiovascular deaths.

---

# Chronic Kidney Disease and Risk Management

comprised about 38% of the events. When participants (119); enrollment criteria included eGFR >60 mL/min/1.73 m2, but efficacy was seen at eGFR >20 mL/min/1.73 m2 in people with heart failure. Most recently, the EMPA-KIDNEY trial showed efficacy in participants with eGFR as low as 20 mL/min/1.73 m2 (115). Hence, the new recommendation is to use SGLT2 inhibitors in individuals with eGFR as low as 20 mL/min/1.73 m2. In addition, the DECLARE-TIMI 58 trial suggested effectiveness in participants with normal urinary albumin levels (120). In sum, for people with type 2 diabetes and CKD, use of an SGLT2 inhibitor is recommended to reduce CKD progression and cardiovascular events in people with an eGFR ≥20 mL/min/1.73 m2.

Of note, GLP-1 RAs may also be used at low eGFR for cardiovascular protection but may require dose adjustment (121).

# Renal and Cardiovascular Outcomes of Mineralocorticoid Receptor Antagonists in Chronic Kidney Disease

MRAs historically have not been well studied in people with diabetes and CKD because of the risk of hyperkalemia (122,123). However, data that do exist suggest sustained benefit on albuminuria reduction. There are two different classes of MRAs, steroidal and nonsteroidal, with one group not extrapolatable to the other (124). Late in 2020, the results of the first of two trials, the Finerenone in Reducing Kidney Failure and Disease Progression in Diabetic Kidney Disease (FIDELIO-DKD) trial, which examined the kidney effects of finerenone, demonstrated a significant reduction in CKD progression and cardiovascular events in people with diabetes and advanced CKD (33,125).

This trial had a primary end point of time to first occurrence of the composite end point of onset of kidney failure, a sustained decrease of eGFR >40% from baseline over at least 4 weeks, or renal death. A prespecified secondary outcome was time to first occurrence of the composite end point of cardiovascular death or nonfatal cardiovascular events (myocardial infarction, stroke, or hospitalization for heart failure). Other secondary outcomes included all-cause mortality, time to all-cause hospitalizations, and change in UACR from baseline to month 4, and time to first occurrence of the following composite end point: onset of kidney failure, a sustained eGFR decrease of ≥57% from baseline over at least 4 weeks, or renal death.

# Study Details

The study randomized eligible subjects to either finerenone (n = 3,686) or placebo (n = 3,666). Participants with an eGFR of 25–60 mL/min/1.73 m2 at the screening visit received an initial dose at baseline of 10 mg once daily, and if eGFR at screening was ≥60 mL/min/1.73 m2, the initial dose was 20 mg once daily. An increase in the dose from 10 to 20 mg once daily was encouraged after 1 month, provided the serum potassium level was ≤4.8 mmol/L and eGFR was stable. The mean age of participants was 64.1 years (31% were female), and the median follow-up duration was 3.4 years. The median A1C was 7.7%, the mean systolic blood pressure was 136 mmHg, and the mean GFR was 67.8 mL/min/1.73 m2. People with heart failure with a reduced ejection fraction and uncontrolled hypertension were excluded.

---

# Chronic Kidney Disease and Risk Management

# Diabetes Care Volume 48, Supplement 1, January 2025

The primary composite outcome was cardiovascular death, myocardial infarction, stroke, and hospitalization for heart failure. The finerenone group showed a 13% reduction in the primary end point compared with the placebo group (12.4% vs. 14.2%; HR 0.87 [95% CI 0.76–0.98]; P = 0.03). This benefit was primarily driven by a reduction in heart failure hospitalizations: 3.2% vs. 4.4% in the placebo group (HR 0.71 [95% CI 0.56–0.90]).

Of the secondary outcomes, the most noteworthy was a 36% reduction in ESKD: 0.9% vs. 1.3% in the placebo group (HR 0.64 [95% CI 0.41–0.995]). There was a higher incidence of hyperkalemia in the finerenone group, 10.8% vs. 5.3%, although only 1.2% of the 3,686 individuals on finerenone stopped the study due to hyperkalemia.

The FIDELITY prespecified pooled efficacy and safety analysis incorporated individuals from both the FIGARO-DKD and FIDELIO-DKD trials (N = 13,171) to allow for evaluation across the spectrum of CKD, since the populations were different (with a slight overlap) and the study designs were similar (127). The analysis showed a 14% reduction in composite cardiovascular death, nonfatal myocardial infarction, nonfatal stroke, and hospitalization for heart failure for finerenone vs. placebo (12.7% vs. 14.4%; HR 0.86 [95% CI 0.78–0.95]; P = 0.0018).

It also demonstrated a 23% reduction in the composite kidney outcome, consisting of sustained ≥57% decrease in eGFR from baseline over ≥4 weeks, or renal death, for finerenone vs. placebo (5.5% vs. 7.1%; HR 0.77 [95% CI 0.67–0.88]; P = 0.0002).

The pooled FIDELITY trial analysis confirms and strengthens the positive cardiovascular and kidney outcomes with finerenone across the spectrum of CKD, irrespective of baseline ASCVD history (with the exclusion of those with heart failure with reduced ejection fraction).

Of note, there has not been a direct comparison of MRAs and SGLT2 inhibitors. At this time, they can be used interchangeably or together for the goal of slowing progression of CKD and providing cardiovascular protection. There have also been no studies directly comparing MRAs, SGLT2 inhibitors, and GLP-1 RAs. Health care professionals should use their best judgement as to which medication to prescribe initially and in combination.

# References

1. de Boer IH, Khunti K, Sadusky T, et al. Diabetes management in chronic kidney disease: a consensus report by the American Diabetes Association (ADA) and Kidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes (KDIGO). Diabetes Care 2022;45:3075–3090
2. Afkarian M, Zelnick LR, Hall YN, et al. Clinical manifestations of kidney disease among US adults with diabetes, 1988-2014. JAMA 2016;316:602–610
3. de Boer IH, Rue TC, Hall YN, Heagerty PJ, Weiss NS, Himmelfarb J. Temporal trends in the prevalence of diabetic kidney disease in the United States. JAMA 2011;305:2532–2539
4. DCCT/EDIC Research Group. Kidney disease and related findings in the Diabetes Control and Complications Trial/Epidemiology of Diabetes Interventions and Complications study. Diabetes Care 2014;37:24–30
5. Johansen KL, Chertow GM, Foley RN, et al. US Renal Data System 2020 annual data report: epidemiology of kidney disease in the United States. Am J Kidney Dis 2021;77:A7–A8
6. Fox CS, Matsushita K, Woodward M, et al.; Chronic Kidney Disease Prognosis Consortium. Associations of kidney disease measures with cardiovascular outcomes. N Engl J Med 2021;385:1737–1749

---

# Chronic Kidney Disease and Risk Management

# Complications

study. Diabetes Care 2010;33: 36. Collard D, Brouwer TF, Peters RJG, Vogt L, van den Born B-JH. Creatinine rise during blood pressure therapy and the risk of adverse clinical outcomes in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus. Hypertension 2018;72:1337–1344

20. He F, Xia X, Wu XF, Yu XQ, Huang FX. Diabetic retinopathy in predicting diabetic nephropathy in patients with type 2 diabetes and renal disease: a meta-analysis. Diabetologia 2013;56:457–466

21. Vistisen D, Andersen GS, Hulman A, Persson F, Rossing P, Jørgensen ME. Progressive decline in estimated glomerular filtration rate in patients with diabetes after moderate loss in kidney function-even without albuminuria. Diabetes Care 2019;42:1886–1894

22. Levey AS, Coresh J, Balk E, et al.; National Kidney Foundation. National Kidney Foundation practice guidelines for chronic kidney disease: evaluation, classification, and stratification. Ann Intern Med 2003;139:137–147

23. Matzke GR, Aronoff GR, Atkinson AJ, Jr, et al. Drug dosing consideration in patients with acute and chronic kidney disease-a clinical update from Kidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes (KDIGO). Kidney Int 2011;80:1122–1137

24. Coresh J, Turin TC, Matsushita K, et al. Decline in estimated glomerular filtration rate and subsequent risk of end-stage renal disease and mortality. JAMA 2014;311:2518–2531

25. Vassalotti JA, Centor R, Turner BJ, Greer RC, Choi M, Sequist TD, National Kidney Foundation Kidney Disease Outcomes Quality Initiative. Practical approach to detection and management of chronic kidney disease for the primary care clinician. Am J Med 2016;129:153–162.e157

26. Zhou J, Liu Y, Tang Y, et al. A comparison of RIFLE, AKIN, KDIGO, and Cys-C criteria for the definition of acute kidney injury in critically ill patients. Int Urol Nephrol 2016;48:125–132

27. Hoste EAJ, Kellum JA, Selby NM, et al. Global epidemiology and outcomes of acute kidney injury. Nat Rev Nephrol 2018;14:607–625

28. James MT, Grams ME, Woodward M, et al.; CKD Prognosis Consortium. A meta-analysis of the association of estimated GFR, albuminuria, diabetes mellitus, and hypertension with acute kidney injury. Am J Kidney Dis 2015;66:602–612

29. Perkovic V, Jardine MJ, Neal B, et al.; CREDENCE Trial Investigators. Canagliflozin and renal outcomes in type 2 diabetes and nephropathy. N Engl J Med 2019;380:2295–2306

30. Nadkarni GN, Ferrandino R, Chang A, et al. Acute kidney injury in patients on SGLT2 inhibitors: a propensity-matched analysis. Diabetes Care 2017;40:1479–1485

31. Wanner C, Inzucchi SE, Lachin JM, et al.; EMPA-REG OUTCOME Investigators. Empagliflozin and progression of kidney disease in type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med 2016;375:323–334

32. Neuen BL, Ohkuma T, Neal B, et al. Cardiovascular and renal outcomes with canagliflozin according to baseline kidney function. Circulation 2018;138:1537–1550

33. Bakris GL, Agarwal R, Anker SD, et al.; FIDELIO-DKD Investigators. Effect of finerenone on chronic kidney disease outcomes in type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med 2020;383:2219–2229

34. Thakar CV, Christianson A, Himmelfarb J, Leonard AC. Acute kidney injury episodes and chronic kidney disease risk in diabetes mellitus. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 2011;6:2567–2572

35. Bakris GL, Weir MR. Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor-associated elevations in serum creatinine: is this a cause for concern? Arch Intern Med 2000;160:685–693

36. Whelton PK, Carey RM, Aronow WS, et al. 2017 ACC/AHA/AAPA/ABC/ACPM/AGS/APhA/ASH/ ASPC/NMA/PCNA guideline for the prevention, detection, evaluation, and management of high blood pressure in adults: executive summary: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines. Hypertension 2018;71:1269–1324

37. Malhotra R, Craven T, Ambrosius WT, et al.; SPRINT Research Group. Effects of intensive blood pressure lowering on kidney tubule injury in CKD: a longitudinal subgroup analysis in SPRINT. Am J Kidney Dis 2019;73:21–30

38. Hughes-Austin JM, Rifkin DE, Beben T, et al. The relation of serum potassium concentration with cardiovascular events and mortality in community-living individuals. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 2017;12:245–252

39. Bandak G, Sang Y, Gasparini A, et al. Hyperkalemia after initiating renin-angiotensin system blockade: the Stockholm Creatinine Measurements (SCREAM) project. J Am Heart Assoc 2017;6

40. Nilsson E, Gasparini A, Arnlöv J, et al. Incidence and determinants of hyperkalemia and hypokalemia in a large healthcare system. Int J Cardiol 2017;245:277–284

41. Zelniker TA, Raz I, Mosenzon O, et al. Effect of dapagliflozin on cardiovascular outcomes according to baseline kidney function and albuminuria status in patients with type 2 diabetes: a prespecified secondary analysis of a randomized clinical trial. JAMA Cardiol 2021;6:801–810

42. Epstein M, Reaven NL, Funk SE, McGaughey KJ, Oestreicher N, Knispel J. Evaluation of the treatment gap between clinical guidelines and the utilization of renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system inhibitors. Am J Manag Care 2015;21: S212–220

43. de Boer IH, Gao X, Cleary PA, et al.; Diabetes Control and Complications Trial/Epidemiology of Diabetes Interventions and Complications (DCCT/EDIC) Research Group. Albuminuria changes and cardiovascular and renal outcomes in type 1 diabetes: the DCCT/EDIC study. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 2016;11:1969–1977

44. Sumida K, Molnar MZ, Potukuchi PK, et al. Changes in albuminuria and subsequent risk of incident kidney disease. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 2017;12:1941–1949

45. Wexler DJ, de Boer IH, Ghosh A, et al.; GRADE Research Group. Comparative effects of glucose-lowering medications on kidney outcomes in type 2 diabetes: the GRADE randomized clinical trial. JAMA Intern Med 2023;183:705–714

46. Klahr S, Levey AS, Beck GJ, et al.; Modification of Diet in Renal Disease Study Group. The effects of dietary protein restriction and blood-pressure control on the progression of chronic renal disease. N Engl J Med 1994;330:877–884

47. Ikizler TA, Burrowes JD, Byham-Gray LD, et al. KDOQI clinical practice guideline for nutrition in CKD: 2020 update. Am J Kidney Dis 2020;76:S1–S107

48. Rhee CM, Wang AY-M, Biruete A, et al. Nutritional and dietary management of chronic kidney disease under conservative and preservative kidney care without dialysis. J Ren Nutr 2023;33:S56–S66

49. Mills KT, Chen J, Yang W, et al.; Chronic Renal Insufficiency Cohort (CRIC) Study Investigators. Sodium excretion and the risk of cardiovascular disease in patients with chronic kidney disease. JAMA 2016;315:2200–2210

50. Whelton PK, Carey RM, Aronow WS, et al. 2017 ACC/AHA/AAPA/ABC/ACPM/AGS/APhA/ASH/ ASPC/NMA/PCNA guideline for the prevention, detection, evaluation, and management of high blood pressure in adults: executive summary: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines. Hypertension 2018;71:1269–1324

51. Murray DP, Young L, Waller J, et al. Is dietary protein intake predictive of 1-year mortality in dialysis patients? Am J Med Sci 2018;356:234–243

52. DCCT/EDIC Research Group. Effect of intensive diabetes treatment on albuminuria in type 1 diabetes: long-term follow-up of the Diabetes Control and Complications Trial and Epidemiology of Diabetes Interventions and Complications study. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol 2014;2:793–800

53. de Boer IH, Sun W, Cleary PA, et al.; DCCT/EDIC Research Group. Intensive diabetes therapy and glomerular filtration rate in type 1 diabetes. N Engl J Med 2011;365:2366–2376

54. UK Prospective Diabetes Study (UKPDS) Group. Intensive blood-glucose control with sulphonylureas or insulin compared with conventional treatment and risk of complications in patients with type 2 diabetes (UKPDS 33). Lancet 1998;352:837–853

55. Patel A, MacMahon S, Chalmers J, et al.; ADVANCE Collaborative Group. Intensive blood glucose control and vascular outcomes in patients with type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med 2008;358:2560–2572

56. Ismail-Beigi F, Craven T, Banerji MA, et al.; ACCORD trial group. Effect of intensive treatment of hyperglycaemia on microvascular outcomes in type 2 diabetes: an analysis of the ACCORD randomised trial. Lancet 2010;376:419–430

57. Zoungas S, Chalmers J, Neal B, et al.; ADVANCE-ON Collaborative Group. Follow-up of blood-pressure lowering and glucose control in type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med 2014;371:1392–1406

58. Zoungas S, Arima H, Gerstein HC, et al.; Collaborators on Trials of Lowering Glucose (CONTROL) group. Effects of intensive glucose control on microvascular outcomes in patients with type 2 diabetes: a meta-analysis of individual participant data from randomised controlled trials. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol 2017;5:431–437

59. Agrawal L, Azad N, Bahn GD, et al.; VADT Study Group. Long-term follow-up of intensive glycaemic control on renal outcomes in the Veterans Affairs Diabetes Trial (VADT). Diabetologia 2018;61:295–299

60. Papademetriou V, Lovato L, Doumas M, et al.; ACCORD Study Group. Chronic kidney disease and intensive glycemic control increase cardiovascular risk in patients with type 2 diabetes. Kidney Int 2015;87:649–659

61. Perkovic V, Heerspink HL, Chalmers J, et al.; ADVANCE Collaborative Group. Intensive glucose control improves kidney outcomes in patients with type 2 diabetes. Kidney Int 2013;83:517–523

62. Wong MG, Perkovic V, Chalmers J, et al.; ADVANCE-ON Collaborative Group. Long-term benefits of intensive glucose control for preventing end-stage kidney disease: ADVANCE-ON. Diabetes Care 2016;39:694–700

---

# Chronic Kidney Disease and Risk Management

# Diabetes Care Volume 48, Supplement 1, January 2025

1. National Kidney Foundation. KDOQI clinical practice guideline for diabetes and CKD: 2012 update. Am J Kidney Dis 2012;60:850–886
2. Tuttle KR, Bakris GL, Bilous RW, et al. Diabetic kidney disease: a report from an ADA Consensus Conference. Diabetes Care 2014;37:2864–2883
3. Kidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes (KDIGO) Diabetes Work Group. KDIGO 2022 clinical practice guideline for diabetes management in chronic kidney disease. Kidney Int 2022;102:S1–S127
4. Leehey DJ, Zhang JH, Emanuele NV, et al.; VA NEPHRON-D Study Group. BP and renal outcomes in diabetic kidney disease: the Veterans Affairs Nephropathy in Diabetes Trial. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 2015;10:2159–2169
5. Emdin CA, Rahimi K, Neal B, Callender T, Perkovic V, Patel A. Blood pressure lowering in type 2 diabetes: a systematic review and meta-analysis. JAMA 2015;313:603–615
6. Cushman WC, Evans GW, Byington RP, et al.; ACCORD Study Group. Effects of intensive blood-pressure control in type 2 diabetes mellitus. N Engl J Med 2010;362:1575–1585
7. UK Prospective Diabetes Study Group. Tight blood pressure control and risk of macrovascular and microvascular complications in type 2 diabetes: UKPDS 38. BMJ 1998;317:703–713
8. de Boer IH, Bangalore S, Benetos A, et al. Diabetes and hypertension: a position statement by the American Diabetes Association. Diabetes Care 2017;40:1273–1284
9. Brenner BM, Cooper ME, de Zeeuw D, et al.; RENAAL Study Investigators. Effects of losartan on renal and cardiovascular outcomes in patients with type 2 diabetes and nephropathy. N Engl J Med 2001;345:861–869
10. Lewis EJ, Hunsicker LG, Bain RP, Rohde RD; The Collaborative Study Group. The effect of angiotensin-converting-enzyme inhibition on diabetic nephropathy. N Engl J Med 1993;329:1456–1462
11. Lewis EJ, Hunsicker LG, Clarke WR, et al.; Collaborative Study Group. Renoprotective effect of the angiotensin-receptor antagonist irbesartan in patients with nephropathy due to type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med 2001;345:851–860
12. Heart Outcomes Prevention Evaluation Study Investigators. Effects of ramipril on cardiovascular and microvascular outcomes in people with diabetes mellitus: results of the HOPE study and MICRO-HOPE substudy. Lancet 2000;355:253–259
13. Barnett AH, Bain SC, Bouter P, et al.; Diabetics Exposed to Telmisartan and Enalapril Study Group. Angiotensin-receptor blockade versus converting-enzyme inhibition in type 2 diabetes and nephropathy. N Engl J Med 2004;351:1952–1961
14. Wu H-Y, Peng C-L, Chen P-C, et al. Comparative effectiveness of angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors versus angiotensin II receptor blockers for major renal outcomes in patients with diabetes: a 15-year cohort study. PLoS One 2017;12:e0177654
15. Parving HH, Lehnert H, Br€ochner-Mortensen J, Gomis R, Andersen S, Arner P; Irbesartan in Patients with Type 2 Diabetes and Microalbuminuria Study Group. The effect of irbesartan on the development of diabetic nephropathy in patients with type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med 2001;345:870–878
16. Fried LF, Emanuele N, Zhang JH, et al.; VA NEPHRON-D Investigators. Combined angiotensin inhibition for the treatment of diabetic nephropathy. N Engl J Med 2013;369:1892–1903
17. Cherney DZI, Perkins BA, Soleymanlou N, et al. Renal hemodynamic effect of sodium-glucose cotransporter 2 inhibition in patients with type 1 diabetes mellitus. Circulation 2014;129:587–597
18. Heerspink HJL, Desai M, Jardine M, Balis D, Meininger G, Perkovic V. Canagliﬂozin slows progression of renal function decline independently of glycemic effects. J Am Soc Nephrol 2017;28:368–375
19. Neal B, Perkovic V, Mahaffey KW, et al.; CANVAS Program Collaborative Group. Canagliﬂozin and cardiovascular and renal events in type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med 2017;377:644–657
20. Zelniker TA, Braunwald E. Cardiac and renal effects of sodium-glucose co-transporter 2 inhibitors in diabetes: JACC state-of-the-art review. J Am Coll Cardiol 2018;72:1845–1855
21. Woods TC, Satou R, Miyata K, et al. Canagliﬂozin prevents intrarenal angiotensinogen augmentation and mitigates kidney injury and

---

# Chronic Kidney Disease and Risk Management

receptor agonists and sodium-glucose cotransporter 2 inhibitors for prevention of major adverse cardiovascular and renal outcomes in type 2 diabetes mellitus. Circulation 2019;139:2022–2031

115. Herrington WG, Staplin N, Wanner C, et al.; The Empa-Kidney Collaborative Group. Empagliﬂozin in patients with chronic kidney disease. N Engl J Med 2023;388:117–127

116. Wiviott SD, Raz I, Bonaca MP, et al.; DECLARE–TIMI 58 Investigators. Dapagliﬂozin and cardiovascular outcomes in type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med 2019;380:347–357

117. Chertow GM, Vart P, Jongs N, et al.; DAPA-CKD Trial Committees and Investigators. Effects of dapagliﬂozin in stage 4 chronic kidney disease. J Am Soc Nephrol 2021;32:2352–2361

118. Anker SD, Butler J, Filippatos G, et al.; EMPEROR-Preserved Trial Investigators. Empagliﬂozin in heart failure with a preserved ejection fraction. N Engl J Med 2021;385:1451–1461

119. Packer M, Anker SD, Butler J, et al.; EMPEROR-Reduced Trial Investigators. Cardiovascular and renal outcomes with empagliﬂozin in heart failure. N Engl J Med 2020;383:1413–1424

120. Mosenzon O, Wiviott SD, Heerspink HJL, et al. The effect of dapagliﬂozin on albuminuria in DECLARE-TIMI 58. Diabetes Care 2021;44:1805–1815

121. Romera I, Cebrián-Cuenca A, Guisasola F, Gomez-Peralta F, Reviriego J. A review of practical issues on the use of glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor agonists for the management of type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Ther 2019;10:5–19

122. Bomback AS, Kshirsagar AV, Amamoo MA, Klemmer PJ. Change in proteinuria after adding aldosterone blockers to ACE inhibitors or angiotensin receptor blockers in CKD: a systematic review. Am J Kidney Dis 2008;51:199–211

123. Sarafidis P, Papadopoulos CE, Kamperidis V, Giannakoulas G, Doumas M. Cardiovascular protection with sodium-glucose cotransporter-2 inhibitors and mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists in chronic kidney disease: a milestone achieved. Hypertension 2021;77:1442–1455

124. Agarwal R, Kolkhof P, Bakris G, et al. Steroidal and non-steroidal mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists in cardiorenal medicine. Eur Heart J 2021;42:152–161

125. Filippatos G, Anker SD, Agarwal R, et al.; FIDELIO-DKD Investigators. Finerenone and cardiovascular outcomes in patients with chronic kidney disease and type 2 diabetes. Circulation 2021;143:540–552

126. Pitt B, Filippatos G, Agarwal R, et al.; FIGARO-DKD Investigators. Cardiovascular events with finerenone in kidney disease and type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med 2021;385:2252–2263

127. Agarwal R, Filippatos G, Pitt B, et al.; FIDELIO-DKD and FIGARO-DKD investigators. Cardiovascular and kidney outcomes with finerenone in patients with type 2 diabetes and chronic kidney disease: the FIDELITY pooled analysis. Eur Heart J 2022;43:474–484

128. Smart NA, Dieberg G, Ladhani M, Titus T. Early referral to specialist nephrology services for preventing the progression to end-stage kidney disease. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2014:CD007333

129. Liang S, Zhang X-G, Cai G-Y, et al. Identifying parameters to distinguish non-diabetic renal diseases from diabetic nephropathy in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus: a meta-analysis. PLoS One 2013;8:e64184

---

