# 1. Improving Care and Promoting Health in Populations: Standards of Care in Diabetes—2025

Diabetes Care 2025;48(Suppl. 1):S14–S26 | https://doi.org/10.2337/dc25-S001

Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/48/Supplement_1/S14/791468/dc25s001.pdf by guest on 16 December 2024

The American Diabetes Association (ADA) “Standards of Care in Diabetes” includes the ADA’s current clinical practice recommendations and is intended to provide the components of diabetes care, general treatment goals and guidelines, and tools to evaluate quality of care. Members of the ADA Professional Practice Committee, an interprofessional expert committee, are responsible for updating the Standards of Care annually, or more frequently as warranted. For a detailed description of ADA standards, statements, and reports, as well as the evidence-grading system for ADA’s clinical practice recommendations and a full list of Professional Practice Committee members, please refer to Introduction and Methodology. Readers who wish to comment on the Standards of Care are invited to do so at professional.diabetes.org/SOC.

# DIABETES AND POPULATION HEALTH Recommendations

1. Ensure treatment decisions are timely, rely on evidence-based guidelines, capture key elements within the social determinants of health, and are made collaboratively with people with or at risk for diabetes and caregivers based on individual preferences, prognoses, comorbidities, and informed considerations. B
2. Align approaches to diabetes management with evidence-based models. These models emphasize person-centered team care, integrated long-term treatment approaches to diabetes and comorbidities, and ongoing collaborative communication and goal setting between all team members and with people with diabetes. A
3. Care systems should facilitate in-person and virtual team-based care, include those knowledgeable and experienced in diabetes management as part of the team, and utilize patient registries, decision support tools, proactive care planning, and community involvement to meet needs of individuals with diabetes. B
4. Assess diabetes management, risk factors, and complications (Table 4.1) using reliable and relevant data metrics to improve processes of care and health outcomes, with attention to care costs, individual preferences and goals for care, and treatment burden. B
5. Health systems should adopt a culture of quality improvement, implement benchmarking programs, and engage interprofessional teams to support sustainable and scalable process changes to improve quality of care and health outcomes. A

*A complete list of members of the American Diabetes Association Professional Practice Committee can be found at https://doi.org/10.2337/dc25-SINT. Duality of interest information for each author is available at https://doi.org/10.2337/dc25-SDIS.

Suggested citation: American Diabetes Association Professional Practice Committee. 1. Improving care and promoting health in populations: Standards of Care in Diabetes—2025. Diabetes Care 2025;48 (Suppl. 1):S14–S26

© 2024 by the American Diabetes Association. Readers may use this article as long as the work is properly cited, the use is educational and not for profit, and the work is not altered. More information is available at https://www.diabetesjournals.org/journals/pages/license.

---

# Improving Care and Promoting Health in Populations

Population health is defined as “the health outcomes of a group of individuals, including the distribution of health outcomes within the group” (1). These outcomes can be measured in terms of health indicators (mortality, morbidity, and functional status), disease epidemiology (incidence and prevalence), and behavioral and metabolic factors (physical activity, nutrition, A1C, time in range, etc.) (1). Clinical practice recommendations are tools for health care professionals who seek to improve health across populations; however, for optimal outcomes, diabetes care must also be individualized for each person with diabetes and for each person’s context, as well as across the life span. Thus, efforts to improve population health will require a combination of policy-level, system-level, and person-level approaches. With such an integrated approach in mind, the American Diabetes Association (ADA) highlights the importance of person-centered care, defined as care that considers an individual’s comorbidities and prognoses; is respectful of and responsive to individual preferences, needs, and values; and ensures that the individual’s values guide all clinical decisions (2).

Social determinants of health (SDOH)—factors often beyond an individual’s direct control and potentially representing lifelong risks—play a significant role in both clinical and psychosocial outcomes. To improve health, support overall well-being, and eliminate disparities, it is crucial to address these determinants, particularly for individuals from racial and ethnic minority communities, underserved geographic areas (rural or urban), and those facing socioeconomic barriers to care and health (3). This section discusses the current state of diabetes and diabetes care in the U.S. and provides guidance for health care professionals as well as health systems, community partners, payors, and policymakers on improving the delivery of diabetes care to improve the health of all people at risk for or living with diabetes.

# State of Diabetes Care

The proportion of people with diabetes who achieve recommended A1C, blood pressure, and LDL cholesterol levels has fluctuated over the years, with some improvement over time (4,5). In 2015–2018 (the most recent time period with population-level data available), just 50.5% of U.S. community-dwelling adults with diabetes achieved A1C <7% and 75.4% achieved A1C <8% (5). The goal blood pressure of <130/80 mmHg was achieved by just 47.7% of adults with diabetes, while 70.4% achieved blood pressure of <140/90 mmHg (5). Lipid goals, defined in these studies as non-HDL cholesterol <130 mg/dL, was achieved by 55.7% of adults with diabetes, and all three risk factors were treated to goal in just 22.2% (5).

Importantly, many people who did not attain A1C, blood pressure, and lipid goals were not receiving any or adequate pharmacotherapy for glycemic, hypertension, and dyslipidemia management, respectively, which underscores the urgent need for care delivery systems and structural facilitators (i.e., health and public health policies and payment models) that enable timely and equitable delivery of evidence-based care and address diabetes prevention and treatment in communities (5).

Diabetes and its associated health complications pose a significant financial hardship to individuals and society. It is estimated that the annual cost of diagnosed diabetes in the U.S. in 2022 was $413 billion, including $307 billion in direct health care costs and $106 billion in reduced productivity (11). After adjusting for inflation, the economic costs of diabetes increased by 7% between 2017 and 2022 and by 35% between 2012 and 2022 (11). This is attributed to both the increased prevalence of diabetes and the higher cost per person with diabetes. People living with diabetes also face financial hardship, which is correlated.

---

# Improving Care and Promoting Health in Populations

# Diabetes Care

# Volume 48, Supplement 1, January 2025

with higher A1C, diabetes distress, and depressive symptoms (12). CCM-aligned programs also improved outcomes, with higher-risk APMs (i.e., models with greater financial risk assumed by the provider, such as capitated payment models) generally associated with greater improvements in diabetes care processes than lower-risk APMs (32). Value-based payment models are hypothesized to better support the implementation and sustainability of innovative care delivery models seeking to improve population health (26,33), though evidence for currently available value-based insurance designs is limited (32).

# Evidence-Based Care Models to Improve Population Health

A major barrier to optimal and comprehensive diabetes care is a delivery system that is often fragmented, lacks clinical information capabilities, is not appropriately incentivized and funded, does not adequately engage people with diabetes and the communities where they live, and is poorly designed for the coordinated and longitudinal delivery of chronic care (14). Several models have been demonstrated to improve aspects of diabetes care delivery and health outcomes.

The Chronic Care Model (CCM) is a commonly used framework for describing diabetes care programs (15). It includes six core elements to optimize the care of people with chronic disease:

1. Delivery system design (moving from a reactive to a proactive care delivery system where planned visits are coordinated through a team-based approach)
2. Self-management support
3. Decision support, particularly at the point of care during a clinical encounter (basing care on evidence-based, effective care guidelines)
4. Clinical information systems (using registries that can provide person-specific and population-based support to the care team)
5. Community resources and policies (identifying or developing resources to support healthy lifestyles)
6. Health systems (to create a quality-oriented culture)

Randomized controlled trials of CCM interventions have shown that while interventions vary, programs that include core components of the CCM decrease A1C (mean difference –0.21% [95% CI –0.30 to –0.13], P <0.001 compared with usual care), with greater improvements seen among adults with higher baseline A1C and with interventions that prioritize timely and appropriate intensification of behavior change (nutrition and physical activity), pharmacologic therapy, and/or social and financial support systems for individuals who have not achieved recommended metabolic goals or are experiencing high burden of treatment.

# Telehealth

Telehealth uses digital tools like video conferencing, mobile apps, and remote monitoring to deliver a range of health services remotely, including clinical care, education, and administrative support. Telemedicine, a subset of telehealth, focuses specifically on remote clinical care, such as diagnosis, treatment, and consultations through real-time communication. Increased access to and effective use of telehealth services, alongside in-person care, can enhance timely access to diabetes care and DSMES services for individuals with diabetes (34–38).

Telehealth should be used to complement but not replace in-person visits for optimal glycemic management (39,40). Increasingly, evidence suggests that various telehealth modalities may facilitate reducing A1C in people with type 2 diabetes compared with usual care or in addition to usual care (41), and findings suggest that telemedicine is a safe method of delivering care for people with type 1 diabetes in rural areas (42). For rural populations or those with limited physical access to health care, telehealth has a growing body of evidence for its effectiveness, particularly with regard to glycemic management as measured by A1C (43–46).

In addition, evidence supports the effectiveness of telehealth in hypertension and dyslipidemia interventions (47). Interactive strategies that facilitate communication between health care professionals and people with diabetes, including the use of web-based portals or text messaging and those that incorporate medication adjustment, appear to be effective in improving outcomes (44,48). Telehealth and other virtual environments can be used to offer diabetes self-management education and clinical support and remove geographic and transportation barriers for individuals living in under-resourced areas.

---

| Subpopulation of a person with diabetes | Team members to engage in care | Unique care considerations |
|---------------------------------------|-----------------------------------|--------------------------------|
| All adults with diabetes | Primary care clinician, CDCES, RDN, and other specialists as available and appropriate to treat comorbidities (Table 4.1) | Assess for and address social determinants of health. |
| Adults treated with intensive insulin therapy, including multiple daily injections of insulin and insulin pump therapy | Clinicians and other health care team members experienced in advanced diabetes management, including technology use | |
| All youth with diabetes | Primary care clinician, pediatric endocrinologist, CDCES, RDN, other specialists as available and appropriate to treat comorbidities (Table 14.1), daycare or school nurse or other professional, behavioral health professional (as needed), and parent(s) or caregiver(s) | Assess for and address social determinants of health and barriers to safety, well-being, and academic performance in school. Engage professionals within the school and extracurricular/after-school activities to ensure safe diabetes management. An individualized diabetes medical management plan should be developed in collaboration with school professionals and parent(s) or caregiver(s). Support gradual developmentally appropriate transfer of self-management from caregivers to the youth with diabetes. |
| Individuals with diabetes and diabetes-related complications or comorbidities | Specialist referrals as appropriate and available (e.g., behavioral health professional, cardiologist, eye specialist, gastroenterologist or hepatologist, neurologist, nephrologist, obesity medicine specialist, or podiatrist), care coordinator/ navigator or case manager, and clinical pharmacist (for those with polypharmacy or complex medication plans) | Screen for functional, cognitive, financial, and logistical barriers to self-management and evidence that self-care demands exceed capacity and available resources and support systems. |
| Individuals with social and/or structural barriers to care | Care coordinator/navigator, social services professional, insurance specialist/navigator, peer-to-peer support (as available), community health worker and/or community paramedic (as available), public health professional, and interpreter (as applicable) | Consider each person's psychosocial needs, available resources, and support systems. |
| Older adults | Geriatric medicine specialist, social services professional, case manager, community services provider, and physical and/or occupational therapist as available and appropriate based on functional status and independence | Consider the older adult's nutritional status, including ability to afford (financial barriers), acquire (accessibility), prepare (cooking), and consume (oral health) nutritious food. Assess for and address needs related to vision, hearing, dexterity, cognition, mobility, and other challenges. |
| Individuals in long-term care settings | Long-term care facility clinicians, nurses, other health care professionals, physical and occupational therapists, and RDN | Engage professionals within the long-term care facility to ensure safe and appropriate diabetes management. |
| Pregnant individuals with diabetes | Maternal-fetal medicine specialist or obstetrician experienced in the care of pregnant individuals with diabetes (particularly for individuals with type 1 diabetes or requiring intensive insulin therapy), CDCES, RDN, eye specialist (particularly for individuals with preexisting type 1 or type 2 diabetes), other specialists as appropriate, and lactation consultant as appropriate | Ensure appropriate postpartum follow-up and care, including transition from obstetric care to established primary care. |
| Individuals with behavioral health conditions | Behavioral health professional, care coordinator/navigator, and social services professional as age and situation appropriate | Use age- and situation-appropriate screening protocols for general and diabetes-related psychosocial concerns. |

CDCES, certified diabetes care and education specialist; RDN, registered dietitian nutritionist.

---

# Improving Care and Promoting Health in Populations

# Diabetes Care

# Volume 48, Supplement 1, January 2025

Areas or with disabilities (49). Telehealth behavior-change efforts of people with diabetes. High-quality DSMES has been shown to improve a person’s self-management, satisfaction, and glycemic outcomes (see Section 5, “Facilitating Positive Health Behaviors and Well-being to Improve Health Outcomes,” for a detailed review of the evidence supporting DSMES). National DSMES standards call for an integrated approach that includes clinical content and skills, behavioral strategies (goal setting, problem-solving, etc.), and engagement with psychosocial concerns (61). Increasingly, such support is available through online or mobile platforms that can support user access and effectiveness. These curricula should be tailored to the needs of their intended populations, including addressing the “digital divide,” i.e., access to the technology required for implementation (46,63).

# Strategies for System-Level Improvement

Optimal diabetes management requires a systematic approach and coordinated team of health care professionals working in an environment where person-centered, high-quality care is a priority (8,17,53,54). While many diabetes care processes and access to technologies have improved nationally in the past decade, the overall quality of care for people with diabetes remains suboptimal (5). Efforts to increase the quality of diabetes care include providing care that is concordant with evidence-based guidelines (54), expanding the role of teams to implement more intensive disease management strategies (19), tracking medication-taking behavior (55), redesigning care processes (56), implementing electronic health record (EHR) population health tools (57), empowering and educating people with diabetes (58), reducing financial barriers (59), leveraging telehealth to improve access to care (43), assessing and addressing psychosocial issues (60,61), and engaging community resources and public policies that support healthy lifestyles (62).

# Cost Considerations for Medication-Taking Behaviors

The cost of diabetes medications and devices is an ongoing barrier to achieving glycemic goals. Based on a national survey conducted in 2021, 18.6% of U.S. adults with type 1 diabetes and 15.8% of adults with insulin-treated type 2 diabetes reported rationing (i.e., skipping, taking less, and/or delaying) their insulin to save money (64). Insulin underuse due to cost has been termed “cost-related medication nonadherence” (here referred to as cost-related barriers to medication use). The ADA Insulin Access and Affordability Working Group has recommended system-level approaches to address this issue, including concepts such as cost-sharing for insured people with diabetes based on the lowest price available, a list price for insulins that closely reflects the net price, and health plans that ensure people with diabetes can access insulin without undue administrative burden or excessive cost (65).

# Access to Care

The Affordable Care Act and Medicaid expansion have increased access to care for many individuals with diabetes, emphasizing the protection of people with preexisting conditions, health promotion, and disease prevention (83). In fact, health insurance coverage increased from 84.7% in 2009 to 90.1% in 2016 for adults with diabetes aged 18–64 years. As of early 2022, more than 35 million people in the U.S. were enrolled in some form of Affordable Care Act–related health insurance (84). Coverage for those aged 65 years remained nearly universal (85).

People with diabetes who have either...

Downloaded from diabetesjournals.org by guest on 16 December 2024

---

# Improving Care and Promoting Health in Populations

Private or public insurance coverage are more likely to meet quality indicators for diabetes care (86). However, even individuals with insurance coverage can experience financial barriers to care, particularly if enrolled in high-deductible health plans. In 2021, 28% of individuals with employer-sponsored health plans were enrolled in high-deductible health plans (87). Such plans are increasing in popularity; by 2023, 51% of private industry employees had the option to enroll in a high-deductible health plan, although only 36% had access to health savings accounts, which can offset some of the out-of-pocket costs incurred with high-deductible plans (88). Switching to a high-deductible health plan has been shown to increase financial hardship among people with diabetes (89), decrease and delay screening for retinopathy (90), decrease blood pressure and A1C monitoring (90), and increase the risks of experiencing both acute (severe hypoglycemia, hyperglycemic crises) (91) and chronic (myocardial infarction, stroke, hospitalization for heart failure, kidney failure, lower-extremity complications, proliferative retinopathy, and blindness) (92) diabetes complications. Insurance coverage and formulary design influence treatment decisions; it is essential that payors cover evidence-based diabetes care with minimal cost sharing by the person with diabetes. Health care teams should also discuss insurance coverage and financial barriers to care with all individuals with diabetes and pursue therapeutic strategies that minimize financial hardship.

# Quality Improvement

A recent Cochrane systematic review concluded that quality improvement (QI) can significantly improve outcomes for people with diabetes (18). As mandated by the Affordable Care Act, the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality developed a National Quality Strategy based on three aims: improving the health of populations, improving overall quality and the personal experience of care, and reducing per capita cost (95). QI methods have been documented to improve diabetes device uptake, increase screening for psychosocial care, and reduce inequities in access to diabetes technologies (96–99). Information and guidance specific to quality improvement and practice transformation for diabetes care are available from the National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases guidance on diabetes care and quality (100).

A successful QI team should include a clinical champion, administrative leader, QI/data specialist, and an individual living with or impacted by diabetes. Using patient registries and EHRs, health systems can evaluate the quality of diabetes care being delivered, benchmark metrics, and perform intervention cycles as part of QI strategies (13,57,101). QI can also be used as an effective strategy to support application of clinical practice recommendations by health care professionals.

# Recommendations

1.6 Health systems should assess and address disparities in diabetes care.

1.7 During clinical encounters, assess for social determinants of health, including food insecurity, housing insecurity, financial barriers, health insurance and health care access, environmental and neighborhood factors, and social capital/social community support, to inform treatment decisions, with referral to appropriate local community resources.

1.8 Provide people with diabetes additional self-management support from lay health coaches, navigators, or community health workers when available.

1.9 Consider the involvement of community health workers to support management of diabetes and cardiovascular risk factors, especially in underserved communities and health care systems.

Health inequities related to diabetes and its complications are well documented, are heavily influenced by SDOH, and have been associated with greater risk for developing diabetes, higher disease prevalence, and worse diabetes-related outcomes (104–106). SDOH are defined as the economic, environmental, political, and social conditions in which people live and are responsible for a major part of health inequality worldwide (107). Greater exposure to adverse SDOH over the life course results in poor health (108). Interventions to address SDOH can improve diabetes-related outcomes (104,109). Using clinical quality data to identify inequities and opportunities for improvement is valuable for health care professionals, health systems, payors, policymakers, and people with diabetes (110).

The Joint Commission requires that all accredited organizations in its ambulatory health care, behavioral health care and human services, critical access hospital, and hospital accreditation programs collect race and ethnicity information and implement specific steps to reduce health care disparities. The Joint Commission specifically requires that organizations designate an individual or individuals to lead efforts to reduce health care disparities, assess.

---

# Improving Care and Promoting Health in Populations

# Diabetes Care Volume 48, Supplement 1, January 2025

health-related social needs and provide in- ultimately not addressed—during the clinical encounter (106). Among people with chronic illnesses, two-thirds of those who reported not taking medications as prescribed due to cost-related barriers never shared this information with their physician (121). A study using data from the National Health Interview Survey (NHIS) (106) found that half of adults with diabetes reported financial stress and about 20% reported food insecurity. Studies of both type 1 diabetes and type 2 diabetes have noted an association of one or more adverse SDOH with health care utilization and poor diabetes outcomes among individuals with diabetes (121,122). It is therefore important for people with diabetes to be screened for SDOH during clinical encounters and be referred to appropriate clinical and community resources to address these needs (Table 1.1). Furthermore, health systems may benefit from compiling an inventory of such resources to facilitate referrals at the point of care. Policies and payment models that support addressing SDOH, both within and outside the health care setting, are needed to ensure that these efforts are both feasible and sustainable. One example of a statewide payment model that incentivizes value-based care, addressing SDOH and funding community-based health care professionals, is the Maryland Total Cost of Care Model, although it is currently limited by a narrow focus on preventing diabetes and does not consider diabetes care quality or health outcomes in people with diabetes (110,123).

Outside of SDOH, there are several contributors to inequities, including bias, institutional practices, and systemic factors (115–117). The ADA recognizes the association between interpersonal, social, and environmental factors and the prevention and treatment of diabetes and has issued a call for research that seeks to better understand how social determinants influence behaviors and how the relationships between these variables might be modified for enhancing the prevention and management of diabetes (104). While a comprehensive strategy to reduce diabetes-related health disparities in populations is yet to be formally studied, general recommendations from other chronic disease management and prevention models can be drawn upon to inform system-level strategies in diabetes (118). For example, the National Academy of Medicine has published a framework for educating health care professionals on the importance of SDOH (119). Furthermore, there are resources available for the inclusion of standardized sociodemographic variables in EHRs to facilitate the measurement of health disparities and the impact of interventions designed to reduce those disparities (95,119,120).

SDOH are not consistently recognized and often go undiscussed—and are ultimately not addressed—during the clinical encounter. Another population in which such issues must be considered is older adults, for whom social difficulties may further impair quality of life and increase the risk of functional dependency (124) (see Section 13, “Older Adults,” for a detailed discussion of social considerations in older adults). Creating system-level mechanisms to screen for SDOH may help overcome structural barriers and communication gaps between people with diabetes and health care professionals (106,125). A number of studies have proven the effectiveness of identifying SDOH by using validated screening tools (126). In addition, brief, validated screening tools for some SDOH exist and could facilitate discussion around factors that significantly impact treatment during the clinical encounter.

Interventions such as food prescription programs are considered promising to address food insecurity by integrating community resources into primary care settings and directly dealing with food deserts in underserved communities (132). In those with diabetes and food insecurity, the priority is mitigating the increased risk for severe hyperglycemia and hypoglycemia (133,134). The reasons for the increased risk of hyperglycemia can include the consumption of inexpensive carbohydrate-rich processed foods, binge eating, financial constraints to filling diabetes medication prescriptions, anxiety and depression, and poor sleep, all contributing to hyperglycemia and poor diabetes self-care behaviors. Hypoglycemia can occur due to inadequate or inconsistent carbohydrate consumption following the administration of sulfonylurea or insulin. Health care professionals should consider these factors when making treatment decisions for people with food insecurity and seek local resources to help people with diabetes and their families.

---

# Improving Care and Promoting Health in Populations

Family members obtain nutritious food more regularly (135).

Housing Insecurity

Housing insecurity has been shown to be directly associated with a person’s ability to maintain their diabetes self-management (136). Housing insecurity often accompanies other barriers that challenge diabetes self-management. Food insecurity, lack of insurance, cognitive impairment, behavioral health concerns, and low literacy and numeracy skills are also factors (135). The prevalence of diabetes among people experiencing housing insecurity is estimated to be around 8% (137). Additionally, people with diabetes and housing insecurity need secure places to keep their diabetes medications and supplies as well as refrigerator access to safely store insulin. The risk for housing insecurity can be ascertained using a brief risk assessment tool developed and validated for use among veterans (138). Given the potential challenges, health care professionals who care for housing-insecure individuals should be familiar with resources to support these individuals or have access to social workers who can facilitate stable housing as a way to improve diabetes care (139).

Refugee, Migrant, and Seasonal Agricultural Workers

Refugee status, like having a diabetes diagnosis, is an independent risk factor for cardiovascular disease (140). In areas undergoing humanitarian crises, refugees are at greater risk for obstacles to achieving optimal chronic disease management, but unfortunately there are few quality investigations into the particular situations of refugees with diabetes. There have been efforts to develop models of care specifically aimed at improving the health of refugee populations, but more work is needed to demonstrate effectiveness of those care models and approaches (141).

Migrant and seasonal agricultural workers likely have a higher risk of type 2 diabetes than the general population. While migrant farmworker–specific data are lacking, most agricultural workers in the U.S. are Latino, a population with a high rate of type 2 diabetes. In addition, living in severe poverty brings with it food insecurity, high chronic stress, and an increased risk of diabetes; there is also an association between the exposure to certain pesticides and the incidence of diabetes (142).

Health Literacy and Numeracy

Health literacy is the degree to which individuals can obtain, process, and understand basic health information and services needed to make appropriate decisions (146,147). Health literacy is strongly associated with individuals engaging in complex disease management and self-care (148). Approximately 9 out of 10 American adults are estimated to have limited or low health literacy (146,149). Clinicians and diabetes care and education specialists should provide easy-to-understand information and reduce unnecessary complexity when developing care plans. Interventions addressing low health literacy in populations with diabetes seem effective in improving diabetes outcomes, including ones focusing primarily on education, self-care training, or disease management. Combining easily adapted materials with formal diabetes education demonstrates effectiveness on clinical and behavioral outcomes in populations with low literacy (150). However, more research is needed to establish the most effective strategies for enhancing retention and application of diabetes knowledge among various populations of people with diabetes (148,151).

Health numeracy is also essential in diabetes prevention and management. Health numeracy requires primary numeric skills, communication needs at no cost to them (145). Use of untrained interpreters, including family members, should be avoided when possible, as this can result in confusing or inaccurate conveyance of information. Accompanying written materials should be in the language appropriate for the individual being supported and at a reading level that is not overly complicated—typically this is defined as a sixth-grade reading level. The National Standards for Culturally and Linguistically Appropriate Services in Health and Health Care (National CLAS Standards) provide guidance on how health care professionals can reduce language barriers by improving their cultural competency, addressing health literacy, and ensuring communication with professional language assistance (145).

---

# Improving Care and Promoting Health in Populations

# Diabetes Care Volume 48, Supplement 1, January 2025

applied health numeracy, and interpretive health numeracy, which is especially important for people using diabetes technologies like insulin pumps (152). An emotional component also affects a person’s ability to understand concepts of risk, probability, and communication of scientific evidence (153). People with prediabetes or diabetes often need to perform numeric tasks such as interpreting food labels and blood glucose levels to make treatment decisions. Thus, both health literacy and numeracy are necessary for enabling effective communication between people with diabetes and health professionals, arriving at a treatment plan, and making diabetes self-management task decisions. If people with diabetes appear not to understand concepts associated with treatment decisions, both can be assessed using standardized screening measures (154). Adjunctive education and support may be indicated if limited health literacy and numeracy are barriers to optimal care decisions (60).

# Social Capital and Community Support

Social capital, which comprises community and personal network instrumental support, promotes better health, whereas lack of social support is associated with poorer health outcomes in individuals with diabetes (104). Of particular concern are the SDOH, including, among others, racism and discrimination (155). These factors are rarely addressed in routine clinical practice but may be underlying reasons for adverse health outcomes and lower engagement in beneficial self-care behaviors and medication use. Optimally identifying and leveraging community resources are core components of chronic care management (15).

Health care community linkages are receiving increasing attention from the American Medical Association, the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, and others to promote the translation of clinical recommendations for nutrition and physical activity in real-world settings (156). Community health workers (CHWs) (157), community paramedics (158), peer supporters (159,160), and lay leaders (161) may assist in the delivery of DSMES services (119,162), particularly in underserved communities. The American Public Health Association defines a CHW as a “frontline public health worker who is a trusted member of and/or has an unusually close understanding of the community served.”

# References

1. Silberberg M, Martinez-Bianchi V, Lyn MJ. What is population health? Prim Care 2019;46:475–484
2. Institute of Medicine (US) Committee on Quality of Health Care in America. Crossing the Quality Chasm: A New Health System for the 21st Century. Washington, DC, National Academies Press, 2001. Available from https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25057539
3. Haire-Joshu D, Hill-Briggs F. The next generation of diabetes translation: a path to health equity. Annu Rev Public Health 2019;40:391–410
4. Ebekozien O, Mungmode A, Sanchez J, et al. Longitudinal trends in glycemic outcomes and technology use for over 48,000 people with type 1 diabetes (2016-2022) from the T1D Exchange Quality Improvement Collaborative. Diabetes Technol Ther 2023;25:765–773
5. Fang M, Wang D, Coresh J, Selvin E. Trends in diabetes treatment and control in U.S. adults, 1999-2018. N Engl J Med 2021;384:2219–2228
6. Kerr EA, Heisler M, Krein SL, et al. Beyond comorbidity counts: how do comorbidity type and severity influence diabetes patients’ treatment priorities and self-management? J Gen Intern Med 2007;22:1635–1640
7. Fernandez A, Schillinger D, Warton EM, et al. Language barriers, physician-patient language concordance, and glycemic control among insured Latinos with diabetes: the Diabetes Study of Northern California (DISTANCE). J Gen Intern Med 2011;26:170–176
8. TRIAD Study Group. Health systems, patients factors, and quality of care for diabetes: a synthesis of findings from the TRIAD study. Diabetes Care 2010;33:940–947
9. Malik FS, Sauder KA, Isom S, et al. Trends in glycemic control among youth and young adults with diabetes: the SEARCH for Diabetes in Youth study. Diabetes Care 2022;45:285–294
10. Foster NC, Beck RW, Miller KM, et al. State of type 1 diabetes management and outcomes from the T1D Exchange in 2016-2018. Diabetes Technol Ther 2019;21:66–72
11. Parker ED, Lin J, Mahoney T, et al. Economic costs of diabetes in the U.S. in 2022. Diabetes Care 2024;47:26–43
12. Patel MR, Zhang G, Heisler M, et al. Measurement and validation of the comprehensive score for financial toxicity (COST) in a population with diabetes. Diabetes Care 2022;45:2535–2543
13. Prahalad P, Hardison H, Odugbesan O, et al.; T1D Exchange Quality Improvement Collaborative. Benchmarking diabetes technology use among 21 U.S. pediatric diabetes centers. Clin Diabetes 2024;42:27–33
14. Chehal PK, Selvin E, DeVoe JE, Mangione CM, Ali MK. Diabetes and the fragmented state of US health care and policy. Health Aff (Millwood) 2022;41:939–946
15. Stellefson M, Dipnarine K, Stopka C. The chronic care model and diabetes management in US primary care settings: a systematic review. Prev Chronic Dis 2013;10:E26
16. Goh LH, Siah CJR, Tam WWS, Tai ES, Young DYL. Effectiveness of the chronic care model for adults with type 2 diabetes in primary care: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Syst Rev 2022;11:273
17. Tricco AC, Ivers NM, Grimshaw JM, et al. Effectiveness of quality improvement strategies on the management of diabetes: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Lancet 2012;379:2252–2261
18. Konnyu KJ, Yogasingam S, Lepine J, et al. Quality improvement strategies for diabetes care: Effects on outcomes for adults living with diabetes.

---

# Improving Care and Promoting Health in Populations

diabetes. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2023;5: CD014513

1. Herges JR, Matulis JC, Kessler ME, Ruehmann LL, Mara KC, McCoy RG. Evaluation of an enhanced primary care team model to improve diabetes care. Ann Fam Med 2022;20:505–511
2. Levengood TW, Peng Y, Xiong KZ, et al.; Community Preventive Services Task Force. Team-based care to improve diabetes management: a community guide meta-analysis. Am J Prev Med 2019;57:e17–e26
3. Fortmann AL, Walker C, Barger K, et al. Care team integration in primary care improves one-year clinical and financial outcomes in diabetes: a case for value-based care. Popul Health Manag 2020;23:467–475
4. Zupa MF, Arena VC, Johnson PA, Thearle MB, Siminerio LM. A coordinated population health approach to diabetes education in primary care. Diabetes Educ 2019;45:580–585
5. Lee JK, McCutcheon LRM, Fazel MT, Cooley JH, Slack MK. Assessment of interprofessional collaborative practices and outcomes in adults with diabetes and hypertension in primary care: a systematic review and meta-analysis. JAMA Netw Open 2021;4:e2036725
6. Eisenstat SA, Chang Y, Porneala BC, et al. Development and implementation of a collaborative team care model for effective insulin use in an academic medical center primary care network. Am J Med Qual 2017;32:397–405
7. Li M, Tang H, Liu X. Primary care team and its association with quality of care for people with multimorbidity: a systematic review. BMC Prim Care 2023;24:20
8. Adler-Milstein J, Linden A, Hollingsworth JM, Ryan AM. Association of primary care engagement in value-based reform programs with health services outcomes: participation and synergies. JAMA Health Forum 2022;3:e220005
9. Bojadzievski T, Gabbay RA. Patient-centered medical home and diabetes. Diabetes Care 2011;34:1047–1053
10. McManus LS, Dominguez-Cancino KA, Stanek MK, et al. The patient-centered medical home as an intervention strategy for diabetes mellitus: a systematic review of the literature. Curr Diabetes Rev 2021;17:317–331
11. Fraze TK, Lewis VA, Tierney E, Colla CH. Quality of care improves for patients with diabetes in medicare shared savings accountable care organizations: organizational characteristics associated with performance. Popul Health Manag 2018;21:401–408
12. Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services. Accountable Health Communities Model. Accessed 15 August 2024. Available from https://www.cms.gov/priorities/innovation/innovation-models/ahcm
13. Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services. Accountable Health Communities (AHC) Model Evaluation: Second Evaluation Report. Accessed 15 August 2024. Available from https://www.cms.gov/priorities/innovation/data-and-reports/2023/ahc-second-eval-rpt
14. Wang S, Weyer G, Duru OK, Gabbay RA, Huang ES. Can alternative payment models and value-based insurance design alter the course of diabetes in the United States? Health Aff (Millwood) 2022;41:980–984
15. Gunter KE, Peek ME, Tanumihardjo JP, et al. Population health innovations and payment to address social needs among patients and communities with diabetes. Milbank Q 2021;99:928–973
16. Reagan L, Pereira K, Jefferson V, et al. Diabetes self-management training in a virtual environment. Diabetes Educ 2017;43:413–421
17. Zhang K, Huang Q, Wang Q, et al. Telemedicine in improving glycemic control among children and adolescents with type 1 diabetes mellitus: systematic review and meta-analysis. J Med Internet Res 2024;26:e51538
18. Garcia JF, Fogel J, Reid M, Bisno DI, Raymond JK. Telehealth for young adults with diabetes: addressing social determinants of health. Diabetes Spectr 2021;34:357–362
19. Khalid A, Dong Q, Chuluunbaatar E, Haldane V, Durrani H, Wei X. Implementation science perspectives on implementing telemedicine interventions for hypertension or diabetes management: scoping review. J Med Internet Res 2023;25:e42134
20. Schmittdiel JA, Gopalan A, Lin MW, Banerjee S, Chau CV, Adams AS. Population health management for diabetes: health care system-level approaches for improving quality and addressing disparities. Curr Diab Rep 2017;17:31
21. Peterson KA, Carlin CS, Solberg LI, Normington J, Lock EF. Care management processes important for high-quality diabetes care. Diabetes Care 2023;46:1762–1769
22. Raebel MA, Schmittdiel J, Karter AJ, Konieczny JL, Steiner JF. Standardizing terminology and definitions of medication adherence and persistence in research employing electronic databases. Med Care 2013;51:S11–S21
23. Feifer C, Nemeth L, Nietert PJ, et al. Different paths to high-quality care: three archetypes of top-performing practice sites. Ann Fam Med 2007;5:233–241
24. Mungmode A, Noor N, Weinstock RS, et al. Making diabetes electronic medical record data actionable: promoting benchmarking and population health improvement using the T1D Exchange Quality Improvement Portal. Clin Diabetes 2022;41:45–55
25. Powell RE, Zaccardi F, Beebe C, et al. Strategies for overcoming therapeutic inertia in type 2 diabetes: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Diabetes Obes Metab 2021;23:2137–2154
26. Herges JR, Neumiller JJ, McCoy RG. Easing the financial burden of diabetes management: a guide for patients and primary care clinicians. Clin Diabetes 2021;39:427–436
27. Young-Hyman D, de Groot M, Hill-Briggs F, Gonzalez JS, Hood K, Peyrot M. Psychosocial care for people with diabetes: a position statement of the American Diabetes Association. Diabetes Care 2016;39:2126–2140
28. Davis J, Fischl AH, Beck J, et al. 2022 National standards for diabetes self-management education and support. Diabetes Care 2022;45:484–494
29. Pullen-Smith B, Carter-Edwards L, Leathers KH. Community health ambassadors: a model for engaging community leaders to promote better health in North Carolina. J Public Health Manag Pract 2008;14(Suppl):S73–S81
30. Tanhapour M, Peimani M, Rostam Niakan Kalhori S, et al. The effect of personalized intelligent digital systems for self-care training on type II diabetes: a systematic review and meta-analysis of clinical trials. Acta Diabetol 2023;60:1599–1631

Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/48/Supplement_1/S14/791468/dc25s001.pdf by guest on 16 December 2024

---

# Improving Care and Promoting Health in Populations

# Diabetes Care

# Volume 48, Supplement 1, January 2025

1. Gaffney A, Himmelstein DU, Woolhandler S. Prevalence and correlates of patient rationing of insulin in the United States: a national survey. Ann Intern Med 2022;175:1623–1626
2. Cefalu WT, Dawes DE, Gavlak G, et al.; Insulin Access and Affordability Working Group. Insulin Access and Affordability Working Group: conclusions and recommendations. Diabetes Care 2018;41:1299–1311
3. Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services. Part D Senior Savings Model. Accessed 26 July 2024. Available from https://www.cms.gov/priorities/innovation/innovation-models/part-d-savings-model
4. Baig K, Dusetzina SB. Premiums and out-of-pocket spending for long-acting insulins under the Medicare Part D Senior Savings Model. JAMA 2022;328:2161–2162
5. American Diabetes Association. State Insulin Copay Caps. Accessed 26 July 2024. Available from https://diabetes.org/tools-resources/affordable-insulin/state-insulin-copay-caps
6. Suran M. All 3 major insulin manufacturers are cutting their prices–here’s what the news means for patients with diabetes. JAMA 2023;329:1337–1339
7. American Diabetes Association. Insulin Cost and Affordability. Leading the Fight for Insulin Affordability. Accessed 26 July 2024. Available from https://diabetes.org/tools-support/insulin-affordability
8. McCoy RG, Van Houten HK, Karaca-Mandic P, Ross JS, Montori VM, Shah ND. Second-line therapy for type 2 diabetes management: the treatment/benefit paradox of cardiovascular and kidney comorbidities. Diabetes Care 2021;44:2302–2311
9. McCoy RG, Van Houten HK, Deng Y, et al. Comparison of diabetes medications used by adults with commercial insurance vs Medicare Advantage, 2016 to 2019. JAMA Netw Open 2021;4:e2035792
10. Benning TJ, Heien HC, Herges JR, Creo AL, Al Nofal A, McCoy RG. Glucagon fill rates and cost among children and adolescents with type 1 diabetes in the United States, 2011-2021. Diabetes Res Clin Pract 2023;206:111026
11. Herges JR, Haag JD, Kosloski-Tarpenning KA, Mara KC, McCoy RG. Gaps in glucagon fills among commercially insured patients receiving a glucagon prescription. Diabetes Res Clin Pract 2023;200:110720
12. Tilden DR, French B, Datye KA, Jaser SS. Disparities in continuous glucose monitor use between children with type 1 diabetes living in urban and rural areas. Diabetes Care 2024;47:346–352
13. Patel PM, Thomas D, Liu Z, Aldrich-Renner S, Clemons M, Patel BV. Systematic review of disparities in continuous glucose monitoring and insulin pump utilization in the United States: key themes and evidentiary gaps. Diabetes Obes Metab 2024;26:4293–4301
14. Eberly LA, Yang L, Eneanya ND, et al. Association of race/ethnicity, gender, and socioeconomic status with sodium-glucose cotransporter 2 inhibitor use among patients with diabetes in the US. JAMA Netw Open 2021;4:e216139
15. Eberly LA, Yang L, Essien UR, et al. Racial, ethnic, and socioeconomic inequities in glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor agonist use among patients with diabetes in the US. JAMA Netw Open 2024;7:e243394

# References

1. Gibson DM. Estimates of the percentage of US adults with diabetes who could be screened for diabetic retinopathy in primary care settings. JAMA Ophthalmol 2019;137:440–444
2. Kahkoska AR, Busby-Whitehead J, Jonsson Funk M, et al. Receipt of diabetes specialty care and management services by older adults with diabetes in the U.S., 2015–2019: an analysis of Medicare fee-for-service claims. Diabetes Care 2024;47:1181–1185
3. Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. The National Quality Strategy: Fact Sheet. Accessed 26 July 2024. Available from https://www.ahrq.gov/workingforquality/about/nqs-fact-sheets/nqs-fact-sheet-0214.html
4. Odugbesan O, Mungmode A, Rioles N, et al.; T1D Exchange Quality Improvement Collaborative. Increasing continuous glucose monitoring use for non-Hispanic Black and Hispanic people with type 1 diabetes: results from the T1D Exchange Quality Improvement Collaborative Equity Study. Clin Diabetes 2024;42:40–48
5. Odugbesan O, Wright T, Jones N-HY, et al.; T1D Exchange Quality Improvement Collaborative. Increasing social determinants of health screening rates among six endocrinology centers across the United States: results from the T1D Exchange Quality Improvement Collaborative. Clin Diabetes 2024;42:49–55
6. Prahalad P, Ebekozien O, Alonso GT, et al.; T1D Exchange Quality Improvement Collaborative Study Group. Multi-clinic quality improvement initiative increases continuous glucose monitoring use among adolescents and young adults with type 1 diabetes. Clin Diabetes 2021;39:264–271
7. Bratke H, Biringer E, Ushakova A, et al. Ten years of improving glycemic control in pediatric diabetes care: data from the Norwegian Childhood Diabetes Registry. Diabetes Care 2024;47:1122–1130
8. National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases (NIDDK). Diabetes for Health Professionals. Accessed 26 July 2024. Available from https://www.niddk.nih.gov/health-information/professionals/clinical-tools-patient-management/diabetes
9. O’Connor PJ, Sperl-Hillen JM, Fazio CJ, Averbeck BM, Rank BH, Margolis KL. Outpatient diabetes clinical decision support: current status and future directions. Diabet Med 2016;33:734–741
10. Rosenthal MB, Cutler DM, Feder J. The ACO rules–striking the balance between participation and transformative potential. N Engl J Med 2011;365:e6
11. Washington AE, Lipstein SH. The Patient-Centered Outcomes Research Institute–promoting better information, decisions, and health. N Engl J Med 2011;365:e31
12. Hill-Briggs F, Adler NE, Berkowitz SA, et al. Social determinants of health and diabetes: a scientific review. Diabetes Care 2020;44:258–279
13. Zakaria NI, Tehranifar P, Laferrere B, Albrecht SS. Racial and ethnic disparities in glycemic control among insured US adults. JAMA Netw Open 2023;6:e2336307
14. Patel MR, Piette JD, Resnicow K, Kowalski-Dobson T, Heisler M. Social determinants of health, cost-related nonadherence, and cost-reducing behaviors among adults with diabetes: findings from the National Health Interview Survey. Med Care 2016;54:796–803

---

# Improving Care and Promoting Health in Populations

# References

1. Commission on Social Determinants of Health, World Health Organization. Closing the Gap in a Generation: Health Equity Through Action on the Social Determinants of Health. 2008. Accessed 26 July 2024. Available from https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/WHO-IER-CSDH-08.1
2. Dixon B, Pe~na M-M, Taveras EM. Lifecourse approach to racial/ethnic disparities in childhood obesity. Adv Nutr 2012;3:73–82
3. Egede LE, Walker RJ, Linde S, et al. Nonmedical interventions for type 2 diabetes: evidence, actionable strategies, and policy opportunities. Health Aff (Millwood) 2022;41:963–970
4. Jiang DH, O’Connor PJ, Huguet N, Golden SH, McCoy RG. Modernizing diabetes care quality measures. Health Aff (Millwood) 2022;41:955–962
5. Joint Commission. R3 Report. Requirement, Rationale, Reference. Accessed 22 August 2024. Available from https://www.jointcommission.org/-/media/tjc/documents/standards/r3-reports/r3_disparities_july2022-6-20-2022.pdf
6. Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services. CMS Framework for Health Equity 2022–2032. Accessed 15 August 2024. Available from https://www.cms.gov/ﬁles/document/cms-framework-health-equity-2022.pdf
7. National Committee for Quality Assurance. Healthcare Effectiveness Data and Information Set (HEDIS-MY) 2024. Accessed 15 August 2024. Available from https://www.ncqa.org/wp-content/uploads/HEDIS-MY-2024-Measure-Description.pdf
8. Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services. Quality Payment Program. Explore Measures & Activities. Accessed 15 August 2024. Available from https://qpp.cms.gov/mips/explore-measures
9. Ebekozien O, Mungmode A, Buckingham D, et al. Achieving equity in diabetes research: borrowing from the field of quality improvement using a practical framework and improvement tools. Diabetes Spectr 2022;35:304–312
10. Odugbesan O, Addala A, Nelson G, et al. Implicit racial-ethnic and insurance-mediated bias to recommending diabetes technology: insights from T1D Exchange Multicenter Pediatric and Adult Diabetes Provider Cohort. Diabetes Technol Ther 2022;24:619–627
11. Ebekozien O, Fantasia K, Farrokhi F, Sabharwal A, Kerr D. Technology and health inequities in diabetes care: how do we widen access to underserved populations and utilize technology to improve outcomes for all? Diabetes Obes Metab 2024;26 Suppl 1:3–13
12. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Secretary’s Advisory Committee on National Health Promotion and Disease Prevention Objectives for 2030. Accessed 26 July 2024. Available from https://health.gov/our-work/national-health-initiatives/healthy-people/healthy-people-2030/secretarys-advisory-committee-2030
13. National Academy of Sciences. A Framework for Educating Health Professionals to Address the Social Determinants of Health. 2016. Accessed 26 July 2024. Available from https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/27854400
14. Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services. Ensuring Proper Use of Electronic Health Record Features and Capabilities. 2016. Accessed 26 July 2024.
15. Hershey JA, Morone J, Lipman TH, Hawkes CP. Social determinants of health, goals and outcomes in high-risk children with type 1 diabetes. Can J Diabetes 2021;45:444–450.e441
16. Walker RJ, Strom Williams J, Egede LE. Influence of race, ethnicity and social determinants of health on diabetes outcomes. Am J Med Sci 2016;351:366–373
17. Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services. Maryland Total Cost of Care Model. Accessed 26 July 2024. Available from https://www.cms.gov/priorities/innovation/innovation-models/md-tccm
18. Huang ES. Management of diabetes mellitus in older people with comorbidities. BMJ 2016;353:i2200
19. O’Gurek DT, Henke C. A practical approach to screening for social determinants of health. Fam Pract Manag 2018;25:7–12
20. Yan AF, Chen Z, Wang Y, et al. Effectiveness of social needs screening and interventions in clinical settings on utilization, cost, and clinical outcomes: a systematic review. Health Equity 2022;6:454–475
21. Rabbitt MP, Hales LJ, Burke MP, Coleman-Jensen A. Household Food Security in the United States in 2022 (Report No. ERR-325). U.S. Department of Agriculture, Economic Research Service. Accessed 22 August 2024. Available from https://search.nal.usda.gov/discovery/fulldisplay?context=L&vid=01NAL_INST:MAIN&docid=alma-9916411232407426
22. Kirby JB, Bernard D, Liang L. The prevalence of food insecurity is highest among Americans for whom diet is most critical to health. Diabetes Care 2021;44:e131–e132
23. Alawode O, Humble S, Herrick CJ. Food insecurity, SNAP participation and glycemic control in low-income adults with predominantly type 2 diabetes: a cross-sectional analysis using NHANES 2007-2018 data. BMJ Open Diabetes Res Care 2023;11:e003205
24. Schroeder EB, Zeng C, Sterrett AT, Kimpo TK, Paolino AR, Steiner JF. The longitudinal relationship between food insecurity in older adults with diabetes and emergency department visits, hospitalizations, hemoglobin A1c, and medication adherence. J Diabetes Complications 2019;33:289–295
25. Hager ER, Quigg AM, Black MM, et al. Development and validity of a 2-item screen to identify families at risk for food insecurity. Pediatrics 2010;126:e26-32–e32
26. Little M, Rosa E, Heasley C, Asif A, Dodd W, Richter A. Promoting healthy food access and nutrition in primary care: a systematic scoping review of food prescription programs. Am J Health Promot 2022;36:518–536
27. Berkowitz SA, Meigs JB, DeWalt D, et al. Material need insecurities, control of diabetes mellitus, and use of health care resources: results of the Measuring Economic Insecurity in Diabetes study. JAMA Intern Med 2015;175:257–265
28. Reid LA, Mendoza JA, Merchant AT, et al. Household food insecurity is associated with diabetic ketoacidosis but not severe hypoglycemia or glycemic control in youth and young adults with youth-onset type 2 diabetes. Pediatr Diabetes 2022;23:982–990
29. White BM, Logan A, Magwood GS. Access to diabetes care for populations experiencing health disparities. J Gen Intern Med 2018;33:510–523

---

# Improving Care and Promoting Health in Populations

# Diabetes Care

# Volume 48, Supplement 1, January 2025

1. Butayeva J, Ratan ZA, Downie S, Hosseinzadeh H. The impact of health literacy interventions on glycemic control and self-management outcomes among type 2 diabetes mellitus: a systematic review. J Diabetes 2023;15:724–735
2. Baumeister A, Aldin A, Chakraverty D, et al. Interventions for improving health literacy in migrants. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2023;11: CD013303
3. Turrin KB, Trujillo JM. Effects of diabetes numeracy on glycemic control and diabetes self-management behaviors in patients on insulin pump therapy. Diabetes Ther 2019;10:1337–1346
4. Schapira MM, Fletcher KE, Gilligan MA, et al. A framework for health numeracy: how patients use quantitative skills in health care. J Health Commun 2008;13:501–517
5. Hesselink G, Cheng J, Schoon Y. A systematic review of instruments to measure health literacy of patients in emergency departments. Acad Emerg Med 2022;29:890–901
6. Williams DR, Lawrence JA, Davis BA. Racism and health: evidence and needed research. Annu Rev Public Health 2019;40:105–125
7. Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. Clinical-community linkages. Accessed 26 July 2024. Available from https://www.ahrq.gov/professionals/prevention-chronic-care/improve/community/index.html
8. Evans J, White P, Ha H. Evaluating the effectiveness of community health worker interventions on glycaemic control in type 2 diabetes: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Lancet 2023;402(Suppl 1):S40
9. Kasper AL, Myers LA, Carlson PN, et al. Diabetes management for community paramedics: development and implementation of a novel curriculum. Diabetes Spectr 2022;35:367–376
10. Azmiardi A, Murti B, Febrinasari RP, Tamtomo DG. The effect of peer support in diabetes self-management education on glycemic control in patients with type 2 diabetes: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Epidemiol Health 2021;43:e2021090
11. Fisher EB, Boothroyd RI, Elstad EA, et al. Peer support of complex health behaviors in prevention and disease management with special reference to diabetes: systematic reviews. Clin Diabetes Endocrinol 2017;3:4
12. Foster G, Taylor SJC, Eldridge SE, Ramsay J, Griffiths CJ. Self-management education programmes by lay leaders for people with chronic conditions. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2007: Cd005108
13. Cuellar AE, Calonge BN. The Community Preventive Services Task Force: 25 years of effectiveness, economics, and equity. Am J Prev Med 2022;62:e371–e373
14. The Network for Public Health Law. Legal Considerations for Community Health Workers and Their Employers. Accessed 22 August 2024. Available from https://www.networkforphl.org/resources/legal-considerations-for-community-health-workers-and-their-employers/
15. Guide to Community Preventive Services. Community health workers help patients manage diabetes. Updated 25 October 2022. Accessed 26 July 2024. Available from https://www.thecommunityguide.org/content/community-health-workers-help-patients-manage-diabetes
16. Piatt GA, Rodgers EA, Xue L, Zgibor JC. Integration and utilization of peer leaders for diabetes self-management support: results from Project SEED (Support, Education, and Evaluation in Diabetes). Diabetes Educ 2018;44:373–382

Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/48/Supplement_1/S14/791468/dc25s001.pdf by guest on 16 December 2024

---

