# 13. Older Adults: Standards of Care in Diabetes—2025

Diabetes Care 2025;48(Suppl. 1):S266–S282 | https://doi.org/10.2337/dc25-S013

Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/48/Supplement_1/S266/791479/dc25s013.pdf by guest on 16 December 2024

The American Diabetes Association (ADA) “Standards of Care in Diabetes” includes the ADA’s current clinical practice recommendations and is intended to provide the components of diabetes care, general treatment goals and guidelines, and tools to evaluate quality of care. Members of the ADA Professional Practice Committee, an interprofessional expert committee, are responsible for updating the Standards of Care annually, or more frequently as warranted. For a detailed description of ADA standards, statements, and reports, as well as the evidence-grading system for ADA’s clinical practice recommendations and a full list of Professional Practice Committee members, please refer to Introduction and Methodology. Readers who wish to comment on the Standards of Care are invited to do so at professional.diabetes.org/SOC.

# Recommendations

13.1 Assess the medical, psychological, functional (self-management abilities), and social domains in older adults with diabetes to provide a framework to determine goals and therapeutic approaches for diabetes management. B

13.2 Screen at least annually for geriatric syndromes (e.g., cognitive impairment, depression, urinary incontinence, falls, persistent pain, and frailty), hypoglycemia, and polypharmacy in older adults with diabetes, as they may affect diabetes management and diminish quality of life. B

Diabetes is a highly prevalent health condition in the aging population. Over 29% of people over the age of 65 years have diabetes (1,2). The number of older adults living with these conditions is expected to increase rapidly in the coming decades. Diabetes in older adults is a highly heterogeneous condition. While type 2 diabetes predominates in the older population as in the younger population, improvements in insulin delivery, technology, and care over the last few decades have led to increasing numbers of people with childhood and adult-onset type 1 diabetes surviving and thriving into their later decades.

Diabetes management in older adults requires regular assessment of medical, psychological, functional, and social domains. When assessing older adults with diabetes, it is important to accurately categorize the type of diabetes as well as other factors, including diabetes duration, the presence of complications, and treatment-related concerns, such as fear of hypoglycemia. Screening for diabetes complications in older adults should be individualized and periodically revisited, as the results of screening tests may impact treatment goals and therapeutic approaches (3–5). Older adults with diabetes have higher rates of functional disability, accelerated muscle loss, mobility impairment, frailty, and coexisting illnesses, such as hypertension, chronic kidney disease, coronary heart disease, stroke, and premature death than those without diabetes. At the same time, older adults with diabetes also require greater caregiver support and are at greater risk than other older adults for.

*A complete list of members of the American Diabetes Association Professional Practice Committee can be found at https://doi.org/10.2337/dc25-SINT. Duality of interest information for each author is available at https://doi.org/10.2337/dc25-SDIS. This section has received endorsement from the American Geriatrics Society.

Suggested citation: American Diabetes Association Professional Practice Committee. 13. Older adults: Standards of Care in Diabetes—2025. Diabetes Care 2025;48(Suppl. 1):S266–S282 © 2024 by the American Diabetes Association. Readers may use this article as long as the work is properly cited, the use is educational and not for profit, and the work is not altered. More information is available at https://www.diabetesjournals.org/journals/pages/license.

---

# Older Adults

Several common geriatric syndromes such as cognitive impairment, depression, urinary incontinence, injurious falls, persistent pain, and frailty as well as polypharmacy (1). These conditions may impact older adults’ diabetes self-management abilities and quality of life if left unaddressed (2,6,7). See Section 4, “Comprehensive Medical Evaluation and Assessment of Comorbidities,” for the full range of issues to consider when caring for older adults with diabetes. The Institute for Healthcare Improvement has developed an evidence-based “4Ms” framework for age-friendly health care that is being adopted by many health systems caring for older adults. The key elements of this approach to the care of older adults are Mentation, Medications, Mobility, and What Matters Most (person centered), with the understanding that any one of the components may affect another domain (8). This approach has been conceptualized to address person-specific issues that may be interrelated and affect diabetes management in older individuals in Fig. 13.1.

The comprehensive assessment described above provides a framework to determine goals and therapeutic approaches (9–11), including whether referral for diabetes self-management education is appropriate (when complicating factors arise or when transitions in care occur) or whether the current plan is too complex for the individual’s self-management ability or for the care partners providing care (12). Particular attention should be paid to complications that can develop over short periods of time and/or would significantly impair functional status, such as visual and lower-extremity complications. Please refer to the American Diabetes Association (ADA) consensus report “Diabetes in Older Adults” for details (3).

A newly recognized clinical entity, diabetes-related dementia, is emerging as distinct from Alzheimer disease and vascular dementia. Diabetes-related dementia is characterized by a slower progression of dementia, absence of typical neuroimaging findings, advanced age, elevated A1C levels, long duration of diabetes, high frequency of insulin use, frailty, sarcopenia, and dynapenia (loss of muscle strength not caused by neurologic or muscular diseases) (18). Ongoing studies are evaluating whether lifestyle interventions may help to maintain cognitive function in older adults (19). However, studies on diabetes prevention or intensive glycemic and blood pressure management have not demonstrated a reduction in cognitive decline (20,21). A recent systematic review and meta-analysis showed that glucose-lowering drugs, such as thiazolidinediones, glucagon-like peptide 1 receptor agonists (GLP-1 RAs), and sodium–glucose cotransporter 2 (SGLT2) inhibitors, have shown small benefits on slowing progression of cognitive decline (22). Cardiovascular risk factors are also associated with an increased risk of cognitive decline.

# NEUROCOGNITIVE FUNCTION

# Recommendation

13.3 Screening for early detection of mild cognitive impairment or dementia should be performed for adults 65 years of age or older at the initial visit, annually, and as appropriate.

# Using the 4Ms Framework of Age-Friendly Health Systems to Address Person-Specific Issues That Can Affect Diabetes Management

# MENTATION

- Self-administration of medications
- Ability to use diabetes technology
- Anxiety, depression, and diabetes distress
- Mild cognitive impairment or dementia
- Coping skills and self-care

# MEDICATIONS

- Treatment burden
- Affordability or insurance coverage
- End-organ disease or complications affecting medication choice
- Polypharmacy
- History of adverse medication effects
- Social and family support
- Risk of hypoglycemia, hypoglycemia unawareness, and fear of hypoglycemia

# MOBILITY

- Foot complications
- Functional ability
- Frailty and sarcopenia
- Leg weakness
- Neuropathy
- Vision and hearing impairment

# WHAT MATTERS MOST

- Discussing goals and expectations
- Symptom and disease burden
- Meal and treatment preferences (e.g., injections and glucose monitoring)
- Risks, burdens, and benefits of treatment
- Loneliness, social isolation, and overall quality of life
- Life expectancy

Figure 13.1—Using the 4Ms framework of age-friendly health systems to address person-specific issues that can affect diabetes management.

---

# Older Adults

# Diabetes Care Volume 48, Supplement 1, January 2025

Management of blood pressure and cholesterol lowering with statins have been associated with a reduced risk of incident dementia and are, thus, particularly important in older adults with diabetes.

Recently, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved two new anti-amyloid monoclonal antibodies for the treatment of early Alzheimer disease. While these drugs lower the amyloid burden in the brain and appear to slow cognitive decline, the slowing is modest and of unclear significance and duration. In addition, a substantial minority of individuals developed imaging abnormalities consistent with brain edema or hemorrhage. Whether these drugs will provide net benefit for older adults with diabetes remains to be determined.

Identifying cognitive impairment early has important implications for diabetes care. The presence of cognitive impairment can make it challenging for health care professionals to help people with diabetes reach individualized glycemic, blood pressure, and lipid goals. Cognitive dysfunction may make it difficult for individuals to perform complex self-care tasks, such as monitoring glucose and administering and adjusting insulin doses. Also, it can hinder their ability to appropriately maintain the timing and nutritional content of their meals. These factors increase risk for hypoglycemia, which, in turn, can worsen cognitive function and have multiple other adverse effects in older individuals with diabetes.

# HYPOGLYCEMIA

# Recommendations

13.4 Ascertain and address episodes of hypoglycemia at routine visits because older adults with diabetes have a greater risk of hypoglycemia, especially when treated with hypoglycemic agents (e.g., sulfonylureas, meglitinides, and insulin).

13.5 Recommend continuous glucose monitoring (CGM) for older adults with type 1 diabetes to improve glycemic outcomes, reduce hypoglycemia, and reduce treatment burden.

13.6 Offer CGM for older adults with type 2 diabetes on insulin therapy to improve glycemic outcomes and reduce hypoglycemia.

13.7 Consider the use of automated insulin delivery systems and other advanced insulin delivery devices such as connected pens to reduce risk of hypoglycemia for older adults, based on individual ability and support system.

Use of Continuous Glucose Monitoring and Advanced Insulin Delivery Devices

For older adults with type 1 diabetes, continuous glucose monitoring (CGM) is a useful approach to predicting and reducing the risk of hypoglycemia. In the Wireless Innovation in Seniors with Diabetes Mellitus (WISDM) trial, adults over 60 years of age with type 1 diabetes were randomized to CGM or standard blood glucose monitoring. Over 6 months, use of CGM resulted in a small but statistically significant reduction in time spent with hypoglycemia (glucose level <70 mg/dL) compared with standard blood glucose monitoring.

---

# Older Adults

1.1% [ 40 to  16 min/day]; P &lt; 0.001) shut off insulin delivery if a hypoglycemic event is imminent and hybrid closed-loop algorithms that automatically adjust insulin infusion rates based on feedback from a CGM to keep glucose levels in a goal range. Advanced insulin delivery devices have been shown to improve glycemic outcomes in both children and adults with type 1 diabetes. Most trials of these devices have included people with type 1 diabetes but relatively few older adults; however, data from two small randomized controlled trials in older adults are available. The Older Adult Closed Loop (ORACL) trial in 30 older adults (mean age 67 years) with type 1 diabetes found that an automated insulin delivery (AID) strategy was associated with significant improvements in TIR compared with sensor-augmented pump therapy. Moreover, they found small but significant decreases in hypoglycemia with the AID strategy. Boughton et al. reported results of an open-label, crossover design clinical trial in 37 older adults ($60 years) in which 16 weeks of treatment with a hybrid closed-loop advanced insulin delivery system was compared with sensor-augmented pump therapy. They found that hybrid closed-loop insulin delivery improved the proportion of time glucose was in range largely due to decreases in hyperglycemia. In contrast to the ORACL study, no significant differences in hypoglycemia were observed. Both studies enrolled older individuals whose blood glucose was relatively well managed (mean A1C 7.4%), and both used a crossover design comparing hybrid closed-loop insulin delivery to sensor-augmented pump therapy. A recent randomized controlled trial of older adults with type 2 diabetes using multiple daily injections who were unable to manage insulin therapy on their own revealed an increase of TIR of 27% over 12 weeks of AID use in addition to tailored home health care services.

# TREATMENT GOALS

# Recommendations

13.8a Older adults with diabetes who are otherwise healthy with few and stable coexisting chronic illnesses and intact cognitive and functional status should have lower glycemic goals (such as A1C &lt;7.0–7.5% [&lt;53–58 mmol/mol]) and/or time in range [TIR] 70–180 mg/dL [3.9–10.0 mmol] of 70% and time below range #70 mg/dL [3.9 mmol/L] of #4%) if CGM is used.

13.8b Older adults with diabetes and intermediate or complex health are clinically heterogeneous with variable life expectancy. Selection of glycemic goals should be individualized and should prioritize avoidance of hypoglycemia, with less stringent goals (such as A1C &lt;8.0% [&lt;64 mmol/mol] and/or TIR 70–180 mg/dL [3.9–10.0 mmol] of 50% and time below range &lt;70 mg/dL [3.9 mmol/L] of &lt;1%) for those with significant cognitive and/or functional limitations, frailty, severe comorbidities, and a less favorable risk-to-benefit ratio of diabetes medications.

13.8c Older adults with very complex or poor health receive minimal benefit from stringent glycemic goals. Clinicians should focus on avoiding hypoglycemia and symptomatic hyperglycemia rather than achieving stringent glycemic goals.

13.9 Screening for diabetes complications should be individualized in older adults with diabetes. Particular attention should be paid to complications that would lead to impairment of functional status or quality of life.

13.10 Treatment of hypertension to individualized goal levels is indicated in most older adults with diabetes.

13.11 Treatment of other cardiovascular risk factors should be individualized in older adults with diabetes, considering the time frame of benefit. Lipid-lowering therapy and antiplatelet agents may benefit those with life expectancies at least equal to the time frame of primary prevention or secondary intervention trials.

---

# Older Adults

# Diabetes Care

Volume 48, Supplement 1, January 2025

The care of older adults with diabetes is complicated by their clinical, cognitive, and functional heterogeneity and their varied prior experience with disease management. Some older individuals may have developed diabetes years earlier and have significant complications, others are newly diagnosed and may have had years of undiagnosed diabetes with resultant complications, and still, other older adults may have truly recent-onset disease with few or no complications (51). Some older adults with diabetes have other underlying chronic conditions, substantial diabetes-related comorbidity, limited cognitive or physical functioning, or frailty (52,53).

Life expectancy is affected by the age of the individual, disease burden, and degree of disability. Multiple prognostic tools for life expectancy for older adults are available (54,55). Notably, the Life Expectancy Estimator for Older Adults with Diabetes (LEAD) tool was developed and validated among older adults with diabetes, and a high risk score was strongly associated with having a life expectancy of <5 years (56). These data may be a useful starting point to inform decisions about selecting less stringent glycemic goals (56,57).

Older adults also vary in their preferences for the intensity and mode of glucose management (58). Health care professionals caring for older adults with diabetes must take this heterogeneity into consideration when setting and prioritizing treatment goals (10,11) (Table 13.1).

# Older Adults With Good Functional Status and Without Complications

There are few long-term studies in older adults demonstrating the benefits of intensive glycemic, blood pressure, and lipid management. Older adults who can be expected to live long enough to realize the benefits of long-term intensive diabetes management, who have good cognitive and physical function, and who choose to do so via shared decision-making may be treated using therapeutic interventions and goals similar to those for younger adults with diabetes (Table 13.1).

As for all people with diabetes, diabetes self-management education and ongoing diabetes self-management support are vital components of diabetes care for older adults and their caregivers. Self-management knowledge and skills should be reassessed following a significant clinical change or hospitalization, when treatment plan changes are made, or when an individual’s functional abilities diminish.

# Older Adults With Complications and Reduced Functionality

Older adults with diabetes categorized as having complex or intermediate health (Table 13.1) are heterogeneous with respect to their function and life expectancy (63–65). Based on concepts of competing mortality and time to benefit, some people in this category with shorter life expectancy will have less benefit from glucose lowering and should have less stringent glycemic goals (66). This is especially true for individuals with advanced diabetes complications, life-limiting comorbid illnesses, frailty, or substantial cognitive or functional impairments.

# Vulnerable Older Adults at the End of Life

For people with diabetes receiving palliative care and end-of-life care, the focus should be to avoid hypoglycemia and symptomatic hyperglycemia while reducing the burdens of glycemic management. Thus, as organ failure develops, the treatment plan will have to be deintensified and one or more agents will need to be discontinued. At the end of life, most agents for type 2 diabetes may be removed (70). There is, however, no consensus for the management of type 1 diabetes in this scenario (71). Consultation with a geriatric specialist might be warranted to...

---

| Characteristics and health status of person with diabetes | Rationale | Reasonable A1C goal* | Reasonable CGM goals | Fasting or preprandial glucose | Bedtime glucose | Blood pressure | Lipids |
|------------------------------------------|-----------|----------------------|------------------------|----------------------------|-----------------|----------------|--------|
| Healthy (few coexisting chronic illnesses, intact cognitive and functional status) | Longer remaining life expectancy | <7.0–7.5% (<53–58 mmol/mol) | TIR 70–180 mg/dL (3.9–10.0 mmol) of ≥70%, and TBR <70 mg/dL (3.9 mmol/L) of <4% | 80–130 mg/dL (4.4–7.2 mmol/L) | 80–180 mg/dL (4.4–10.0 mmol/L) | <130/80 mmHg | Statin, unless contraindicated or not tolerated |
| Complex/intermediate (multiple coexisting chronic illnesses or two or more ADL impairments or mild to moderate cognitive impairment) | Variable life expectancy. Individualize goals, considering: • Severity of comorbidities • Cognitive and functional limitations • Frailty • Risk-to-benefit ratio of diabetes medications • Individual preference | <8.0% (<64 mmol/mol) | TIR 70–180 mg/dL (3.9–10.0 mmol) of ≥50% and TBR <70 mg/dL (3.9 mmol/L) of <1% | 90–150 mg/dL (5.0–8.3 mmol/L) | 100–180 mg/dL (5.6–10.0 mmol/L) | <130/80 mmHg | Statin, unless contraindicated or not tolerated† |
| Very complex/poor health (LTC or end-stage chronic illnesses‡ or moderate to severe cognitive impairment or two or more ADL impairments) | Limited remaining life expectancy makes benefit minimal | Avoid reliance on A1C; glucose management decisions should be based on avoiding hypoglycemia and symptomatic hyperglycemia | | 100–180 mg/dL (5.6–10.0 mmol/L) | 110–200 mg/dL (6.1–11.1 mmol/L) | <140/90 mmHg | Consider likelihood of benefit with statin |

This table represents a consensus framework for considering treatment goals for glycemia, blood pressure, and dyslipidemia in older adults with diabetes. The characteristic categories are general concepts. Not every individual will clearly fall into a particular category. Consideration of individual and care partner preferences, care partner engagement, abilities, and resources is an important aspect of treatment individualization. Additionally, an individual's health status and preferences may change over time. ADL, activities of daily living; CGM, continuous glucose monitoring; LTC, long-term care; TBR, time below range; TIR, time in range. *A lower A1C goal may be set for an individual if achievable without recurrent or severe hypoglycemia or undue treatment burden. †Coexisting chronic illnesses are conditions serious enough to require medications or lifestyle management and may include arthritis, cancer, heart failure, depression, emphysema, falls, hypertension, incontinence, stage 3 or worse chronic kidney disease, myocardial infarction, and stroke. "Multiple" means at least three, but many individuals may have five or more (77). ‡The presence of a single end-stage chronic illness, such as stage 3–4 heart failure or oxygen-dependent lung disease, chronic kidney disease requiring dialysis, or uncontrolled metastatic cancer, may cause significant symptoms or impairment of functional status and significantly reduce life expectancy. Adapted from Kirkman et al. (3).

---

# Older Adults

# Diabetes Care Volume 48, Supplement 1, January 2025

assist with complex medical and functional mass, which may result in sarcopenia or dynapenia (76) and/or osteopenia (77,78). Diabetes is also recognized as an independent risk factor for frailty. Frailty is characterized by decline in physical performance and an increased risk of negative health outcomes due to physiologic vulnerability and functional or psychosocial stressors. Inadequate nutritional intake, particularly inadequate protein intake, can increase the risk of sarcopenia and frailty in older adults. Special attention should be paid to malnutrition or the risk of malnutrition in older adults with diabetes given its association with sarcopenia (79,80). Malnutrition is also associated with decreases in activities of daily living, grip strength, physical performance of lower limbs, cognition, and quality of life (81–83). See Section 5, “Facilitating Positive Health Behaviors and Well-being to Improve Health Outcomes,” for a description of malnutrition and screening recommendations.

# PHARMACOLOGIC THERAPY

# Recommendations

- 13.14 Select medications with low risk of hypoglycemia in older adults with type 2 diabetes, specifically for those with hypoglycemia risk factors. B
- 13.15 Overtreatment of diabetes is common in older adults and should be avoided. B
- 13.16a Deintensify hypoglycemia-causing medications (e.g., insulin, sulfonylureas, or meglitinides) or switch to a medication class with low hypoglycemia risk for individuals who are at high risk for hypoglycemia, using individualized glycemic goals. B
- 13.16b In older adults with diabetes, deintensify diabetes medications for individuals for whom the harms and/or burdens of treatment may be greater than the benefits, within individualized glycemic goals. E
- 13.16c Simplify complex treatment plans (especially insulin) to reduce the risk of hypoglycemia and polypharmacy and decrease the treatment burden if it can be achieved within the individualized glycemic goals. B
- 13.16d In older adults with type 2 diabetes and established or high risk of atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease, heart failure, and/or chronic kidney disease, the treatment plan should include agents that reduce cardiovascular and kidney disease risk, irrespective of glycemia. A
- 13.17 Consider costs of care and coverage when developing treatment plans in order to reduce risk of cost-related barriers to medication taking and self-management behaviors. B

Beyond Glycemic Management Although minimizing hyperglycemia may be important in older individuals with diabetes, greater reductions in morbidity and mortality are likely to result from a clinical focus on comprehensive cardiovascular risk factor modification. There is strong evidence from clinical trials of the value of treating hypertension in older adults (72,73), with treatment of hypertension to individualized target levels indicated in most. There is less evidence for lipid-lowering therapy and aspirin therapy, although the benefits of these interventions for primary and secondary prevention are likely to apply to older adults whose life expectancies equal or exceed the time frames of the clinical trials (74). In the case of statins, the follow-up time of clinical trials ranged from 2 to 6 years. While the time frame of trials can be used to inform treatment decisions, a more specific concept is the time to benefit for a therapy. For statins, a meta-analysis of the previously mentioned trials showed that the time to benefit is 2.5 years (75).

# LIFESTYLE MANAGEMENT

# Recommendations

- 13.12 Recommend healthful eating with adequate protein intake for older adults with diabetes. Recommend regular exercise, including aerobic activity, weight-bearing exercise, and/or resistance training as tolerated in those who can safely engage in such activities. B
- 13.13 For older adults with type 2 diabetes, overweight or obesity, and capacity to exercise safely, an intensive lifestyle intervention focused on dietary changes, physical activity, and modest weight loss (e.g., 5–7%) should be considered for its benefits on quality of life, mobility and physical functioning, and cardiometabolic risk. A

Lifestyle management in older adults should be tailored to frailty status. Diabetes in the aging population is associated with reduced muscle strength, poor muscle quality, and accelerated loss of muscle mass, which may result in sarcopenia or dynapenia (76) and/or osteopenia (77,78). Additionally, several subgroups, including participants who lost at least 10% of baseline body weight at year 1, had improved cardiovascular outcomes (88). Risk factor management was improved with reduced utilization of antihypertensive medications, statins, and insulin (89). In age-stratified analyses, older adults in the trial (60 to early 70s) had similar benefits compared with younger people (90,91). In addition, lifestyle intervention produced benefits on aging relevant outcomes, such as reductions in multimorbidity and improvements in physical function and quality of life (92–95).

---

# Older Adults

Special care is required in prescribing and monitoring pharmacologic therapies in older adults (96), who are at high risk of polypharmacy, have difficulties in maintaining prescribed medication plans, and may have cognitive impairment and functional impairment. Therapeutic choices should take into consideration whether older adults with diabetes live independently, have an engaged care partner, or live in a skilled nursing facility, assisted living facility, or group home. See Fig. 9.3 for general recommendations regarding glucose-lowering treatment for adults with type 2 diabetes and Table 9.2 for person- and drug-specific factors to consider when selecting glucose-lowering agents.

Cost may be an especially important consideration, as older adults tend to be on many medications and live on fixed incomes (97). Accordingly, the costs of care and insurance coverage rules should be considered when developing treatment plans to reduce the risk of cost-related barriers to use (98,99). See Table 9.3 and Table 9.4 for median monthly cost in the U.S. of noninsulin glucose-lowering agents and insulin, respectively.

# Pioglitazone

Pioglitazone, if used at all, should be used very cautiously in older adults on insulin therapy as well as in those with or at risk for heart failure, fluid retention, weight gain, osteoporosis, falls or fractures, and/or macular edema (113,114). Lower doses of pioglitazone in combination therapy may mitigate these side effects.

# Insulin Secretagogues

Sulfonylureas and other insulin secretagogues such as the meglitinides (repaglinide and nateglinide) are associated with hypoglycemia, bone loss (115), and fracture risk (116) and should be used with caution. If used, sulfonylureas with a shorter duration of action, such as glipizide, are preferred, and frequency of hypoglycemia monitored at each visit. Glyburide is a longer-acting sulfonylurea and should be avoided in older adults (117).

Many antimicrobials (most commonly fluoroquinolones and sulfamethoxazole-trimethoprim) interact with sulfonylureas to increase the effective sulfonylurea dose, which may precipitate hypoglycemia (118–120). Sulfonylureas should be reduced or temporarily discontinued in these circumstances.

# Metformin

Metformin is a treatment option for older adults with type 2 diabetes if prescription guidelines are followed carefully. Metformin may be used safely in individuals with an estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) ≥30 mL/min/1.73 m² (111), while lower doses may be used in those with an eGFR 30–45 mL/min/1.73 m². eGFR should be monitored every 3 to 6 months in those at risk for decline in kidney function. However, it is contraindicated in those with advanced renal insufficiency and should be used with caution in those with hypoperfusion, hypoxemia, impaired hepatic function, or heart failure because of the increased risk of lactic acidosis.

Metformin may be temporarily discontinued before procedures including imaging studies using iodinated contrast, during hospitalizations, and when acute illness may compromise renal or liver function. Additionally, metformin can cause gastrointestinal side effects and a reduction in appetite that can be problematic for some older adults. The daily dose should be slowly increased to minimize gastrointestinal side effects, and reduction or elimination of metformin may be necessary for those experiencing persistent gastrointestinal side effects. For those taking metformin long term, monitoring for vitamin B12 deficiency should be considered (112).

# Incretin-Based Therapies

Oral dipeptidyl peptidase 4 (DPP-4) inhibitors have few side effects and minimal risk of hypoglycemia, but their cost may be a barrier to some older adults. DPP-4 inhibitors are relatively weak agents and do not reduce or increase major adverse cardiovascular outcomes generally, and there is no interaction by age-group (121). A challenge of interpreting the age-stratified analyses of this drug class and other cardiovascular outcomes trials is that while most of these analyses were prespecified, they were not powered to detect differences. In general, these medications may be useful in older adults with mild hyperglycemia or with high risk of hypoglycemia, or when metformin is contraindicated. Among DPP-4 inhibitors, linagliptin may be used as an alternative to metformin in older adults with low GFR.

---

# Simplification of Complex Insulin Therapy

| Individual on basal (long- or intermediate-acting)* and/or prandial (short- or rapid-acting)† insulins | Individual on premixed insulin‡ |
|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------|
| Basal insulin | Prandial insulin | Use 70% of total dose as basal only in the morning |

Change timing from bedtime to morning

| Titrate dose of basal insulin based on fasting finger-stick glucose test results over 1 week Fasting goal: 90–150 mg/dL (5.0–8.3 mmol/L) • May change goal based on overall health and goals of care | If prandial insulin >10 units/dose: • Decrease dose by 50% and add noninsulin agent§ Titrate prandial insulin doses down as noninsulin agent doses are increased with aim to discontinue prandial insulin | If prandial insulin ≤10 units/dose: • Discontinue prandial insulin and add noninsulin agent(s)§ |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

If 50% of the fasting finger-stick glucose values are over the goal:
• Increase dose by 2 units
If >2 fasting finger-stick values/week are <80 mg/dL (<4.4 mmol/L):
• Decrease dose by 2 units

Add noninsulin agents§:
• If eGFR is ≥45 mL/min/1.73 m², start metformin 500 mg daily and increase dose every 2 weeks, as tolerated
• If eGFR is <45 mL/min/1.73 m², individual is already taking metformin, or metformin is not tolerated, proceed to second-line agent

Additional Tips
• Do not use rapid- and short-acting insulin at bedtime
• While adjusting prandial insulin, a simplified sliding scale may be used, for example:
  ◦ For premeal glucose >250 mg/dL (>13.9 mmol/L), give 2 units of short- or rapid-acting insulin
  ◦ For premeal glucose >350 mg/dL (>19.4 mmol/L), give 4 units of short- or rapid-acting insulin
• Stop sliding scale when not needed daily

Using individual comorbidities (e.g., CKD, ASCVD, low body weight, and risk of dehydration) and drug characteristics to guide decision-making, as depicted in Fig. 9.3 and Table 9.2, select additional agent(s) as needed:
• Every 2 weeks, adjust insulin dose and/or add glucose-lowering medications based on finger-stick glucose testing performed before lunch and before dinner
• Goal: 90–150 mg/dL (5.0–8.3 mmol/L) before meals; may change goal based on overall health and goals of care ||
• If 50% of premeal finger-stick values over 2 weeks are above goal, increase the dose or add another agent
• If >2 premeal finger-stick values/week are <90 mg/dL (<5.0 mmol/L), decrease the dose of medication

Figure 13.2—Algorithm to simplify insulin administration plans in older individuals. ASCVD, atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease; CKD, chronic kidney disease; eGFR, estimated glomerular filtration rate. *Basal insulins: glargine U-100 and U-300, detemir, degludec, and human NPH. †Prandial insulins: short-acting (regular human insulin) or rapid-acting (lispro, aspart, and glulisine). ‡Premixed insulins: 70/30, 75/25, and 50/50 products. §Examples of noninsulin agents include metformin, sodium–glucose cotransporter 2 inhibitors, dipeptidyl peptidase 4 inhibitors, and glucagon-like peptide 1 receptor agonists. ||See Table 13.1. Figure was adapted with permission from Munshi et al. (109).

diabetes and established atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease (ASCVD) and those at higher ASCVD risk, and newer trials are expanding our understanding of their benefits in other populations (122). See Section 9, "Pharmacologic Approaches to Glycemic Treatment," and Section 10, "Cardiovascular Disease and Risk Management," for a more extensive discussion regarding the specific indications for this class of agents. In a systematic review and meta-analysis of GLP-1 RA trials, these agents have been found to reduce major adverse cardiovascular events, cardiovascular deaths, stroke, and myocardial infarction to the same degree for people over and under 65 years of age (123). While the evidence for this class of agents for older adults continues to grow, there are a number of practical issues that should be considered specifically for older people. These drugs are injectable agents (with the exception of oral semaglutide) (124), which require visual, motor, and cognitive skills for appropriate administration, although most of them have a weekly dosing schedule. GLP-1 RAs may also be associated with nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, or constipation and should be titrated slowly. Given the gastrointestinal side effects of this class, GLP-1 RAs are not preferred in older adults experiencing unexplained weight loss or undernutrition or in those who have recurrent gastrointestinal problems. GLP-1 RAs should be avoided especially in people with problematic constipation, significant gastroparesis, recurrent ileus, or bowel obstruction. Individuals should be monitored regularly for excessive weight loss.

Tirzepatide is a novel dual-acting glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide and GLP-1 RA administered as a once-weekly subcutaneous injection. In phase 3 trials, tirzepatide decreased A1C and weight—generally to a greater extent than other glucose-lowering drugs including semaglutide and insulin—with no significant differences in the safety or efficacy in older compared with younger individuals (125). As the adverse effect profile of tirzepatide is similar to that for GLP-1 RAs, the same precautions for older adults apply (125).

Sodium–Glucose Cotransporter 2 Inhibitors
SGLT2 inhibitors are administered orally, which may be convenient for older adults with diabetes. In those with established ASCVD, these agents have shown cardiovascular benefits (122). This class of agents has also been found to be beneficial for

---


# Table 13.2—Considerations for treatment plan simplification and deintensification/deprescribing in older adults with diabetes

| Characteristics and health status of person with diabetes | Reasonable glycemic goal | Rationale/considerations | When may medication plan simplification be required? | When may treatment deintensification be required? |
|----------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------|--------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------|
| Healthy (few chronic illnesses, intact cognitive and function) | A1C <7.0–7.5% (<53–58 mmol/mol) | • Healthy individuals can perform complex tasks for glycemic management<br>• During acute illness, individuals may be at risk for administration or dosing errors | • Severe or recurrent hypoglycemia on insulin therapy, regardless of A1C<br>• Wide glucose excursions<br>• Cognitive or functional decline following acute illness | • Severe or recurrent hypoglycemia on insulin, sulfonylureas, or meglitinides, regardless of A1C<br>• Wide glucose excursions<br>• Polypharmacy |
| Complex/intermediate (multiple chronic illnesses or two or more ADL impairments or mild to moderate cognitive impairment) | A1C <8.0% (<64 mmol/mol) | • Comorbidities may affect self-management abilities and capacity to avoid hypoglycemia | • Severe or recurrent hypoglycemia on insulin therapy, regardless of A1C<br>• Unable to manage complexity of insulin plan<br>• Significant change in social circumstances, such as loss of care partner, change in living situation, or financial difficulties | • Severe or recurrent hypoglycemia on insulin, sulfonylureas, or meglitinides regardless of A1C<br>• Wide glucose excursions<br>• Polypharmacy |
| Community-dwelling individuals receiving short-term care in a skilled nursing facility | Avoid reliance on A1C, glucose goal 100–200 mg/dL (5.6–11.1 mmol/L) | • Glycemic management is important for recovery, wound healing, hydration, and avoidance of infections<br>• Recovery from acute illness may impair cognitive function<br>• More support may be needed on transition to home | • Consider reinstating prehospitalization treatment if it increased in complexity during hospitalization | • Weight loss, anorexia, short-term cognitive decline, and/or loss of physical functioning |
| Very complex/poor health (LTC or end-stage chronic illnesses or moderate to severe cognitive impairment or two or more ADL impairments) | Avoid reliance on A1C and avoid hypoglycemia and symptomatic hyperglycemia | • No benefits of tight glycemic goals in this population<br>• Hypoglycemia should be avoided<br>• Most important outcomes are maintenance of cognitive and functional status | • The individual would like to decrease the number of injections and finger-stick blood glucose monitoring<br>• The individual has an inconsistent eating pattern | • Cognitive dysfunction, depression, anorexia, or inconsistent eating pattern while taking sulfonylureas or meglitinides<br>• Taking any diabetes medications without clear benefits |
| At the end of life | Avoid hypoglycemia and symptomatic hyperglycemia | • Goal is to provide comfort and avoid tasks or interventions that cause pain or discomfort<br>• Care partners are important in providing medical care and maintaining quality of life | • Pain or discomfort caused by treatment (e.g., injections or finger sticks)<br>• Excessive stress of care partners due to treatment complexity | • Taking any diabetes medications without clear benefits in improving symptoms and/or comfort |

Treatment plan simplification refers to changing strategy to decrease the complexity of a medication plan (e.g., fewer administration times and fewer blood glucose checks) and decreasing the need for calculations (such as sliding-scale insulin calculations or insulin-carbohydrate ratio calculations). Deintensification/deprescribing refers to decreasing the dose or frequency of administration of a treatment or discontinuing a treatment altogether. ADL, activities of daily living; LTC, long-term care. Created using information from Munshi et al. 2016 (109) and 2017 (161).

people with heart failure and to slow the progression of chronic kidney disease. See Section 9, "Pharmacologic Approaches to Glycemic Treatment," and Section 10, "Cardiovascular Disease and Risk Management," for a more extensive discussion regarding the indications for this class of agents. Stratified analyses of the trials of this drug class indicate that older adults

---

# Older Adults

# Diabetes Care Volume 48, Supplement 1, January 2025

have similar or greater benefits than younger people (126–128). SGLT2 inhibitors are generally well tolerated among older adults, although thoughtful selection is needed to avoid adverse effects in individuals at elevated risk (129). SGLT2 inhibitors may cause clinically significant volume depletion, for which older adults are at greater risk, and should be used cautiously in older adults who are frail or prone to orthostasis (130). SGLT2 inhibitors cause a higher rate of genital mycotic infections, especially in women, and may need to be discontinued if this effect becomes burdensome (131). Their use is also associated with a small increase in urinary tract infections; caution should be used in people with recurrent or severe urinary tract infections (131). Because SGLT2 inhibitors typically increase urine volume, symptoms of urinary incontinence should be queried before and after SGLT2 inhibitor initiation (132). Euglycemic diabetic ketoacidosis is a rare but potentially serious phenomenon associated with treatment with SGLT2 inhibitors, especially in those with multimorbidity who reside in post-acute and long-term care (PALTC) settings, with infection being the most common trigger (132,133). There is emerging data that SGLT2 inhibitor use may cause an increase in osteoporotic bone fractures, and although more data are needed, clinicians should consider minimizing SGLT2 inhibitor use in older adults at high fracture risk.

# Insulin Therapy

The use of insulin therapy requires that individuals or their caregivers have good visual and motor skills and cognitive ability to manage the appropriate insulin dose using insulin pens or syringes. Insulin therapy relies on the ability of the older person with diabetes to administer insulin on their own or with the assistance of a care partner, to monitor glucose levels, and, eventually, to recognize and treat hypoglycemia. Insulin doses should be titrated to meet individualized glycemic goals and to avoid hypoglycemia. Once-daily basal insulin injection therapy is associated with minimal side effects and may be a reasonable option in many older adults (134). When choosing a basal insulin, long-acting insulin analogs have been found to be associated with a lower risk of hypoglycemia compared with NPH insulin in the Medicare population. Multiple daily injections of insulin may be with type 1 diabetes; however, this population has unique challenges and requires distinct treatment considerations (139). Insulin is an essential life-preserving therapy for people with type 1 diabetes, unlike for those with type 2 diabetes. To avoid diabetic ketoacidosis, older adults with type 1 diabetes need some form of basal insulin even when they are unable to ingest meals. Insulin may be delivered through an insulin pump or injections. CGM is approved for use by Medicare and can play a critical role in improving A1C, reducing glycemic variability, and reducing risk of hypoglycemia (45) (see Section 7, “Diabetes Technology,” and Section 9, “Pharmacologic Approaches to Glycemic Treatment”). In older people with type 1 diabetes, administration of insulin may become more difficult as complications, cognitive impairment, and functional impairment arise. This increases the importance of care partners in the lives of these individuals. Many older people with type 1 diabetes require placement in PALTC settings (i.e., nursing homes and skilled nursing facilities), and unfortunately staff in these settings are less familiar with CGM devices, insulin pumps, or advanced insulin delivery devices. Nevertheless, a feasibility study in LTC facilities showed that CGM can be useful in older adults with diabetes, although it requires substantial staff training (140). Furthermore, an observational study of older adults with diabetes living in LTC facilities using CGM revealed a high prevalence of hypoglycemia both in people using insulin and in those using sulfonylureas, thus showing that this population of older adults in LTC facilities are at increased risk for hypoglycemia (141). Therefore, using CGM can provide useful and more prompt information on hypoglycemia in this vulnerable population. Of note, a recent randomized controlled trial in LTC facilities showed that real-time CGM use for up to 60 days was safe and effective in guiding insulin doses compared with BGM by point of care. There were no differences in TIR, time below range, or mean glucose levels (142). Some staff may be less knowledgeable about the differences between type 1 and type 2 diabetes. Diabetic ketoacidosis may be mistaken for sepsis, end-organ failure, or other electrolyte abnormalities. In these instances, the individual or their family may be more familiar with their diabetes management plan than the staff or health care professionals.

---

# Older Adults

relevant support staff and health care professionals in rehabilitation and PALTC settings regarding insulin dosing and use of pumps and CGM is recommended as part of general diabetes education (see Recommendations 13.18 and 13.19).

# TREATMENT IN POST-ACUTE AND LONG-TERM CARE SETTINGS

# Recommendations

13.18 Recommend diabetes education/training (including that for CGM devices, insulin pumps, and advanced insulin delivery systems) for the staff of long-term care and rehabilitation facilities to improve the management of older adults with diabetes.

13.19 People with diabetes residing in long-term care facilities need careful assessment of mobility, mentation, medications, and management preferences to establish individualized glycemic goals and to make appropriate choices of glucose-lowering agents and devices (including CGM devices, insulin pumps, and advanced insulin delivery systems) based on their clinical and functional status. See Fig. 13.1 for the 4Ms framework to address person-specific issues that affect diabetes management in older individuals.

Management of diabetes in the LTC setting is unique. Individualization of health care is important for all people with diabetes; however, practical guidance is needed for health care professionals as well as the LTC staff and care partners. Training should include diabetes detection and institutional quality assessment. PALTC facilities should develop their own policies and procedures for prevention, recognition, and management of hypoglycemia.

# Nutritional Considerations

An older adult residing in a PALTC facility may have irregular and unpredictable meal consumption, undernutrition, anorexia, and impaired swallowing. Furthermore, therapeutic nutrition plans or modified food consistencies may inadvertently lead to decreased food intake and contribute to unintentional weight loss and undernutrition. Meals tailored to a person’s culture, preferences, and personal goals may increase quality of life, satisfaction with meals, and nutrition status.

# Hypoglycemia

Older adults with diabetes in PALTC are especially vulnerable to hypoglycemia. They have a disproportionately high number of clinical complications and comorbidities that can increase hypoglycemia risk: impaired cognitive and renal function, slowed hormonal regulation and counterregulation, suboptimal hydration, variable appetite and nutritional intake, requirement for feeding assistance, polypharmacy, and slowed intestinal absorption.

# END-OF-LIFE CARE

# Recommendations

13.20 When palliative care is needed in older adults with diabetes, health care professionals should initiate conversations with people with diabetes and their care partners regarding the goals and intensity of care. Strict glucose and blood pressure management are not necessary, and simplification of medication plans can be considered.

13.21 Prioritize the overall comfort, prevention of distressing symptoms, and preservation of quality of life and dignity as primary goals for diabetes management at the end of life.

# Resources

Staff of PALTC facilities should receive appropriate diabetes education to improve the management of older adults with diabetes. Treatments for each person with diabetes should be individualized. Special management considerations include the need to avoid both hypoglycemia and the complications of hyperglycemia.

---

# Older Adults

# Diabetes Care

# Volume 48, Supplement 1, January 2025

(pain, hypoglycemia, hyperglycemia, and dehydration), and preservation of dignity and quality of life in older adults with limited life expectancy (145,149). In the setting of palliative care, health care professionals should initiate conversations with people with diabetes and their care partners regarding the goals and intensity of diabetes care; strict glucose and blood pressure management may not be consistent with achieving comfort and quality of life. Avoidance of severe hypertension and hyperglycemia aligns with the goals of palliative care. In a multicenter trial, withdrawal of statins among people with diabetes in palliative care was found to improve quality of life (150–152). The evidence for the safety and efficacy of deintensification protocols in older adults is growing for both glucose and blood pressure management (104,153) and is clearly relevant for palliative care. An individual has the right to refuse testing and treatment, whereas health care professionals may consider withdrawing treatment and limiting diagnostic testing, including a reduction in the frequency of blood glucose monitoring (154,155).

CGM could be considered when frequent blood glucose testing is burdensome but monitoring for hypoglycemia and hyperglycemia is needed. Glycemic goals should aim to prevent hypoglycemia and hyperglycemia. Treatment interventions need to be mindful of quality of life. Careful monitoring of oral intake is warranted. The decision process may need to involve the individual, family, and care partners, leading to a care plan that is both convenient and effective for the goals of care (156). The pharmacologic therapy may include oral agents as first line, followed by a simplified insulin plan. If needed, basal insulin can be implemented, accompanied by oral agents and without rapid-acting insulin. Agents that can cause gastrointestinal symptoms such as nausea or excess weight loss may not be good choices in this setting. As symptoms progress, some agents may be slowly tapered and discontinued.

Different categories have been proposed for diabetes management in those with advanced disease (70).

1. A stable individual: Continue with the person’s previous medication plan, with a focus on 1) the prevention of hypoglycemia and 2) the management of hyperglycemia using blood glucose monitoring.
2. An individual with organ failure: Preventing hypoglycemia is of greatest significance. Dehydration must be prevented and treated. In people with type 1 diabetes, insulin administration may be reduced as the oral intake of food decreases but should not be stopped. For those with type 2 diabetes, agents that may cause hypoglycemia should be reduced in dose.
3. A dying individual: For people with type 2 diabetes, the discontinuation of all medications may be a reasonable approach, as these individuals are unlikely to have any oral intake. In people with type 1 diabetes, there is no consensus, but a small amount of basal insulin may maintain glucose levels and prevent acute hyperglycemic complications and symptom burden.

Finally, diabetes health care professionals are well positioned to support people with diabetes in advance care planning. Health care professionals can assist people with diabetes in clarifying and documenting their values, preferences, and goals for care in an advance care plan (157). Advance care plans are guides and decision aids to help health care professionals and care partners make difficult treatment decisions when the person with diabetes is no longer able to make decisions for themselves. Research shows that people with diabetes want to discuss end-of-life care plans with their health care professional (158). Two validated tools exist to support health care professionals in this process: the Supportive and Palliative Care Indicators Tool (159) and the Gold Standards Framework Proactive Identification Guidance (160).

In conclusion, the management of diabetes in older adults at the end of life necessitates a person-centered approach that prioritizes comfort, symptom management, quality of life, and the preservation of dignity.

# References

1. Laiteerapong N, Huang ES. Diabetes in older adults. In Diabetes in America, 3rd ed. Cowie CC, Casagrande SS, Menke A, et al., Eds. National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, 2018. Accessed 1 October 2024. Available from https://www.niddk.nih.gov/about-niddk/strategic-plans-reports/diabetes-in-america-3rd-edition
2. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. National Diabetes Statistics Report. 2024. Accessed 31 August 2024. Available from https://www.cdc.gov/diabetes/php/data-research/index.html
3. Kirkman MS, Briscoe VJ, Clark N, et al. Diabetes in older adults. Diabetes Care 2012;35:2650–2664
4. Young-Hyman D, de Groot M, Hill-Briggs F, Gonzalez JS, Hood K, Peyrot M. Psychosocial care for people with diabetes: a position statement of the American Diabetes Association. Diabetes Care 2016;39:2126–2140
5. Institute of Medicine of the National Academies. Cognitive aging: progress in understanding and opportunities for action. Accessed 31 August 2024. Available from https://nationalacademies.org/hmd/Reports/2015/Cognitive-Aging.aspx
6. Sudore RL, Karter AJ, Huang ES, et al. Symptom burden of adults with type 2 diabetes across the disease course: diabetes & aging study. J Gen Intern Med 2012;27:1674–1681
7. Laiteerapong N, Karter AJ, Liu JY, et al. Correlates of quality of life in older adults with diabetes: the diabetes & aging study. Diabetes Care 2011;34:1749–1753
8. Cacchione PZ. Age-friendly health systems: the 4Ms framework. Clin Nurs Res 2020;29:139–140
9. McClintock MK, Dale W, Laumann EO, Waite L. Empirical redefinition of comprehensive health and well-being in the older adults of the United States. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2016;113: E3071–E3080
10. Laiteerapong N, Iveniuk J, John PM, Laumann EO, Huang ES. Classification of older adults who have diabetes by comorbid conditions, United States, 2005-2006. Prev Chronic Dis 2012;9:E100
11. Blaum C, Cigolle CT, Boyd C, et al. Clinical complexity in middle-aged and older adults with diabetes: the Health and Retirement Study. Med Care 2010;48:327–334
12. Tinetti ME, Costello DM, Naik AD, et al. Outcome goals and health care preferences of older adults with multiple chronic conditions. JAMA Netw Open 2021;4:e211271
13. Xue M, Xu W, Ou Y-N, et al. Diabetes mellitus and risks of cognitive impairment and dementia: a systematic review and meta-analysis of 144 prospective studies. Ageing Res Rev 2019;55:100944
14. Roberts RO, Knopman DS, Przybelski SA, et al. Association of type 2 diabetes with brain atrophy and cognitive impairment. Neurology 2014;82:1132–1141
15. Xu WL, von Strauss E, Qiu CX, Winblad B, Fratiglioni L. Uncontrolled diabetes increases the risk of Alzheimer’s disease: a population-based cohort study. Diabetologia 2009;52:1031–1039
16. Yaffe K, Falvey C, Hamilton N, et al. Diabetes, glucose control, and 9-year cognitive decline among older adults without dementia. Arch Neurol 2012;69:1170–1175
17. Rawlings AM, Sharrett AR, Schneider ALC, et al. Diabetes in midlife and cognitive change over 20 years: a cohort study. Ann Intern Med 2014;161:785–793
18. Huang L, Zhu M, Ji J. Association between hypoglycemia and dementia in patients with diabetes.

---

# Older Adults

diabetes: a systematic review and meta-analysis of 1.4 million patients. Diabetol Metab Syndr 2022;14:31

19. Livingston G, Huntley J, Sommerlad A, et al. Dementia prevention, intervention, and care: 2020 report of the Lancet Commission. Lancet 2020;396:413–446

20. Launer LJ, Miller ME, Williamson JD, et al.; ACCORD MIND investigators. Effects of intensive glucose lowering on brain structure and function in people with type 2 diabetes (ACCORD MIND): a randomised open-label substudy. Lancet Neurol 2011;10:969–977

21. Luchsinger JA, Ma Y, Christophi CA, et al.; Diabetes Prevention Program Research Group. Metformin, lifestyle intervention, and cognition in the Diabetes Prevention Program Outcomes Study. Diabetes Care 2017;40:958–965

22. Tian S, Jiang J, Wang J, et al. Comparison on cognitive outcomes of antidiabetic agents for type 2 diabetes: a systematic review and network meta-analysis. Diabetes Metab Res Rev 2023;39:e3673

23. van Dyck CH, Swanson CJ, Aisen P, et al. Lecanemab in early Alzheimer’s disease. N Engl J Med 2023;388:9–21

24. Sims JR, Zimmer JA, Evans CD, et al.; TRAILBLAZER-ALZ 2 Investigators. Donanemab in early symptomatic Alzheimer disease: the TRAILBLAZER-ALZ 2 randomized clinical trial. JAMA 2023;330:512–527

25. National Institute on Aging. Assessing cognitive impairment in older patients. Accessed 31 August 2024. Available from https://www.nia.nih.gov/health/assessing-cognitive-impairment-older-patients

26. Alzheimer’s Association. Cognitive assessment. Accessed 31 August 2024. Available from https://alz.org/professionals/healthcare-professionals/cognitive-assessment

27. Folstein MF, Folstein SE, McHugh PR. “Mini-mental state”. A practical method for grading the cognitive state of patients for the clinician. J Psychiatr Res 1975;12:189–198

28. Borson S, Scanlan JM, Chen P, Ganguli M. The Mini-Cog as a screen for dementia: validation in a population-based sample. J Am Geriatr Soc 2003;51:1451–1454

29. Nasreddine ZS, Phillips NA, Bedirian V, et al. The Montreal Cognitive Assessment, MoCA: a brief screening tool for mild cognitive impairment. J Am Geriatr Soc 2005;53:695–699

30. Moreno G, Mangione CM, Kimbro L, Vaisberg E; American Geriatrics Society Expert Panel on Care of Older Adults with Diabetes Mellitus. Guidelines abstracted from the American Geriatrics Society Guidelines for Improving the Care of Older Adults with Diabetes Mellitus: 2013 update. J Am Geriatr Soc 2013;61:2020–2026

31. American Psychological Association. Guidelines for the evaluation of dementia and age-related cognitive change, 2021. Accessed 31 August 2024. Available from https://www.apa.org/practice/guidelines/dementia.aspx

32. Lee AK, Lee CJ, Huang ES, Sharrett AR, Coresh J, Selvin E. Risk factors for severe hypo- glycemia in black and white adults with diabetes: the Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities (ARIC) study. Diabetes Care 2017;40:1661–1667

33. Feinkohl I, Aung PP, Keller M, et al.; Edinburgh Type 2 Diabetes Study (ET2DS) Investigators. Severe hypoglycemia and cognitive decline in older adults with type 2 diabetes: the Edinburgh Type 2 Diabetes Study. Diabetes Care 2022;45:381–390

34. Lee AK, Rawlings AM, Lee CJ, et al. Severe hypoglycaemia, mild cognitive impairment, dementia and brain volumes in older adults with type 2 diabetes: the Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities (ARIC) cohort study. Diabetologia 2018;61:1956–1965

35. Jacobson AM, Ryan CM, Braffett BH, et al.; DCCT/EDIC Research Group. Cognitive performance declines in older adults with type 1 diabetes: results from 32 years of follow-up in the DCCT and EDIC study. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol 2021;9:436–445

36. Karter AJ, Warton EM, Lipska KJ, et al. Development and validation of a tool to identify patients with type 2 diabetes at high risk of hypoglycemia-related emergency department or hospital use. JAMA Intern Med 2017;177:1461–1470

37. Gerstein HC, Miller ME, Byington RP, et al.; Action to Control Cardiovascular Risk in Diabetes Study Group. Effects of intensive glucose lowering in type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med 2008;358:2545–2559

38. Duckworth W, Abraira C, Moritz T, et al.; VADT Investigators. Glucose control and vascular complications in veterans with type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med 2009;360:129–139

39. Toschi E, Slyne C, Sifre K, et al. The relationship between CGM-derived metrics, A1C, and risk of hypoglycemia in older adults with type 1 diabetes. Diabetes Care 2020;43:2349–2354

40. Carlson AL, Kanapka LG, Miller KM, et al.; WISDM Study Group. Hypoglycemia and glycemic control in older adults with type 1 diabetes: baseline results from the WISDM study. J Diabetes Sci Technol 2021;15:582–592

41. Pratley RE, Kanapka LG, Rickels MR, et al.; Wireless Innovation for Seniors With Diabetes Mellitus (WISDM) Study Group. Effect of continuous glucose monitoring on hypoglycemia in older adults with type 1 diabetes: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA 2020;323:2397–2406

42. Miller KM, Kanapka LG, Rickels MR, et al. Benefit of continuous glucose monitoring in reducing hypoglycemia is sustained through 12 months of use among older adults with type 1 diabetes. Diabetes Technol Ther 2022;24:424–434

43. Gubitosi-Klug RA, Braffett BH, Bebu I, et al. Continuous glucose monitoring in adults with type 1 diabetes with 35 years duration from the DCCT/EDIC study. Diabetes Care 2022;45:659–665

44. Karter AJ, Parker MM, Moffet HH, Gilliam LK, Dlott R. Association of real-time continuous glucose monitoring with glycemic control and acute metabolic events among patients with insulin-treated diabetes. JAMA 2021;325:2273–2284

45. Ruedy KJ, Parkin CG, Riddlesworth TD, Graham C, DIAMOND Study Group. Continuous glucose monitoring in older adults with type 1 and type 2 diabetes using multiple daily injections of insulin: results from the DIAMOND trial. J Diabetes Sci Technol 2017;11:1138–1146

46. Bao S, Bailey R, Calhoun P, Beck RW. Effectiveness of continuous glucose monitoring in older adults with type 2 diabetes treated with basal insulin. Diabetes Technol Ther 2022;24:299–306

47. McAuley SA, Trawley S, Vogrin S, et al. Closed-loop insulin delivery versus sensor augmented pump therapy in older adults with type 1 diabetes: an open-label multicentre, multinational, randomised, crossover study. Lancet Healthy Longev 2022;3:e135–e142

48. Boughton CK, Hartnell S, Thabit H, et al. Hybrid closed-loop glucose control compared with sensor augmented pump therapy in older adults with type 1 diabetes: an open-label multicentre, multinational, randomised, crossover study. Lancet Healthy Longev 2022;3:e135–e142

49. Reznik Y, Carvalho M, Fendri S, et al. Should people with type 2 diabetes treated by multiple daily insulin injections with home health care support be switched to hybrid closed-loop? The CLOSE AP1 randomized controlled trial. Diabetes Obes Metab 2024;26:622–630

50. Forlenza GP, Carlson AL, Galindo RJ, et al. Real-world evidence supporting tandem control-IQ hybrid closed-loop success in the medicare and medicaid type 1 and type 2 diabetes populations. Diabetes Technol Ther 2022;24:814–823

51. Selvin E, Coresh J, Brancati FL. The burden and treatment of diabetes in elderly individuals in the U.S. Diabetes Care 2006;29:2415–2419

52. Bandeen-Roche K, Seplaki CL, Huang J, et al. Frailty in older adults: a nationally representative profile in the United States. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci 2015;70:1427–1434

53. Kalyani RR, Tian J, Xue Q-L, et al. Hyperglycemia and incidence of frailty and lower extremity mobility limitations in older women. J Am Geriatr Soc 2012;60:1701–1707

54. Pilla SJ, Schoenborn NL, Maruthur NM, Huang ES. Approaches to risk assessment among older patients with diabetes. Curr Diab Rep 2019;19:59

55. Griffith KN, Prentice JC, Mohr DC, Conlin PR. Predicting 5- and 10-year mortality risk in older adults with diabetes. Diabetes Care 2020;43:1724–1731

56. Karter AJ, Parker MM, Moffet HH, et al. Development and validation of the Life Expectancy Estimator for Older Adults with Diabetes (LEAD): the diabetes and aging study. J Gen Intern Med 2023;38:2860–2869

57. Deardorff WJ, Covinsky K. Incorporating prognosis into clinical decision-making for older adults with diabetes. J Gen Intern Med 2023;38:2857–2859

58. Brown SES, Meltzer DO, Chin MH, Huang ES. Perceptions of quality-of-life effects of treatments for diabetes mellitus in vulnerable and non-vulnerable older patients. J Am Geriatr Soc 2008;56:1183–1190

59. National Glycohemoglobin Standardization Program. Factors that interfere with HbA1c test results. Accessed 31 August 2024. Available from https://www.ngsp.org/factors.asp

60. Parrinello CM, Selvin E. Beyond HbA1c and glucose: the role of nontraditional glycemic markers in diabetes diagnosis, prognosis, and management. Curr Diab Rep 2014;14:548

61. Selvin E, Rawlings AM, Lutsey PL, et al. Fructosamine and glycated albumin and the risk of cardiovascular outcomes and death. Circulation 2015;132:269–277

62. Rooney MR, Daya N, Tang O, et al. Glycated albumin and risk of mortality in the US adult population. Clin Chem 2022;68:422–430

63. Leung V, Wroblewski K, Schumm LP, Huisingh-Scheetz M, Huang ES. Reexamining the classification of older adults with diabetes by comorbidities and exploring relationships with

---

# Older Adults

# Diabetes Care Volume 48, Supplement 1, January 2025

frailty, disability, and 5-year mortality. J Gerontol aging, and body composition study. Diabetes study. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci 2018;73: 1552–1559

64. Cigolle CT, Kabeto MU, Lee PG, Blaum CS. Clinical complexity and mortality in middle-aged and older adults with diabetes. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci 2012;67:1313–1320

65. Le P, Ayers G, Misra-Hebert AD, et al. Adherence to the American Diabetes Association’s glycemic goals in the treatment of diabetes among older Americans, 2001-2018. Diabetes Care 2022; 45:1107–1115

66. Huang ES, Zhang Q, Gandra N, Chin MH, Meltzer DO. The effect of comorbid illness and functional status on the expected benefits of intensive glucose control in older patients with type 2 diabetes: a decision analysis. Ann Intern Med 2008;149:11–19

67. Huang ES, Laiteerapong N, Liu JY, John PM, Moffet HH, Karter AJ. Rates of complications and mortality in older patients with diabetes mellitus: the diabetes and aging study. JAMA Intern Med 2014;174:251–258

68. Huang ES, Liu JY, Lipska KJ, et al. Data-driven classification of health status of older adults with diabetes: the diabetes and aging study. J Am Geriatr Soc 2023;71:2120–2130

69. Rooney MR, Tang O, Echouffo Tcheugui JB, et al. American Diabetes Association framework for glycemic control in older adults: implications for risk of hospitalization and mortality. Diabetes Care 2021;44:1524–1531

70. Sinclair A, Dunning T, Colagiuri S. International Diabetes Federation (IDF) Global Guideline for Managing Older People with Type 2 Diabetes. International Diabetes Federation, 2013

71. Angelo M, Ruchalski C, Sproge BJ. An approach to diabetes mellitus in hospice and palliative medicine. J Palliat Med 2011;14:83–87

72. Beckett NS, Peters R, Fletcher AE, et al.; HYVET Study Group. Treatment of hypertension in patients 80 years of age or older. N Engl J Med 2008;358:1887–1898

73. de Boer IH, Bangalore S, Benetos A, et al. Diabetes and hypertension: a position statement by the American Diabetes Association. Diabetes Care 2017;40:1273–1284

74. Gencer B, Marston NA, Im K, et al. Efficacy and safety of lowering LDL cholesterol in older patients: a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials. Lancet 2020;396:1637–1643

75. Yourman LC, Cenzer IS, Boscardin WJ, et al. Evaluation of time to benefit of statins for the primary prevention of cardiovascular events in adults aged 50 to 75 years: a meta-analysis. JAMA Intern Med 2021;181:179–185

76. Mori H, Kuroda A, Yoshida S, et al. High prevalence and clinical impact of dynapenia and sarcopenia in Japanese patients with type 1 and type 2 diabetes: findings from the Impact of Diabetes Mellitus on Dynapenia study. J Diabetes Investig 2021;12:1050–1059

77. Park SW, Goodpaster BH, Strotmeyer ES, et al.; Health, Aging, and Body Composition Study. Accelerated loss of skeletal muscle strength in older adults with type 2 diabetes: the health, aging, and body composition study. Diabetes Care 2007;30:1507–1512

78. Park SW, Goodpaster BH, Strotmeyer ES, et al. Decreased muscle strength and quality in older adults with type 2 diabetes: the health, aging, and body composition study.

79. Tao J, Ke Y-Y, Zhang Z, et al. Comparison of the value of malnutrition and sarcopenia for predicting mortality in hospitalized old adults over 80 years. Exp Gerontol 2020;138:111007

80. Beaudart C, Sanchez-Rodriguez D, Locquet M, Reginster J-Y, Lengel e L, Bruyere O. Malnutrition as a strong predictor of the onset of sarcopenia. Nutrients 2019;11:11

81. Liu G-X, Chen Y, Yang Y-X, et al. Pilot study of the Mini Nutritional Assessment on predicting outcomes in older adults with type 2 diabetes. Geriatr Gerontol Int 2017;17:2485–2492

82. Malara A, Sgro G, Caruso C, et al. Relationship between cognitive impairment and nutritional assessment on functional status in Calabrian long-term-care. Clin Interv Aging 2014; 9:105–110

83. Alfonso-Rosa RM, Del Pozo-Cruz B, Del Pozo-Cruz J, Del Pozo-Cruz JT, Sannudo B. The relationship between nutritional status, functional capacity, and health-related quality of life in older adults with type 2 diabetes: a pilot explanatory study. J Nutr Health Aging 2013;17:315–321

84. Pahor M, Guralnik JM, Ambrosius WT, et al.; LIFE study investigators. Effect of structured physical activity on prevention of major mobility disability in older adults: the LIFE study randomized clinical trial. JAMA 2014;311:2387–2396

85. Bray G, Gregg E, Haffner S, et al.; Look Ahead Research Group. Baseline characteristics of the randomised cohort from the Look AHEAD (Action for Health in Diabetes) study. Diab Vasc Dis Res 2006;3:202–215

86. Curtis JM, Horton ES, Bahnson J, et al.; Look AHEAD Research Group. Prevalence and predictors of abnormal cardiovascular responses to exercise testing among individuals with type 2 diabetes: the Look AHEAD (Action for Health in Diabetes) study. Diabetes Care 2010;33:901–907

87. Wing RR, Bolin P, Brancati FL, et al.; Look AHEAD Research Group. Cardiovascular effects of intensive lifestyle intervention in type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med 2013;369:145–154

88. Gregg E, Jakicic J, Blackburn G, et al.; Look AHEAD Research Group. Association of the magnitude of weight loss and changes in physical fitness with long-term cardiovascular disease outcomes in overweight or obese people with type 2 diabetes: a post-hoc analysis of the Look AHEAD randomised clinical trial. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol 2016;4:913–921

89. Gregg EW, Chen H, Wagenknecht LE, et al.; Look AHEAD Research Group. Association of an intensive lifestyle intervention with remission of type 2 diabetes. JAMA 2012;308:2489–2496

90. Rejeski WJ, Bray GA, Chen S-H, et al.; Look AHEAD Research Group. Aging and physical function in type 2 diabetes: 8 years of an intensive lifestyle intervention. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci 2015;70:345–353

91. Espeland MA, Rejeski WJ, West DS, et al.; Action for Health in Diabetes Research Group. Intensive weight loss intervention in older individuals: results from the Action for Health in Diabetes Type 2 diabetes mellitus trial. J Am Geriatr Soc 2013;61:912–922

92. Houston DK, Neiberg RH, Miller ME, et al. Physical function following a long-term lifestyle intervention among middle aged and older adults with type 2 diabetes: the Look AHEAD study.

93. Simpson FR, Pajewski NM, Nicklas B, et al.; Indices for Accelerated Aging in Obesity and Diabetes Ancillary Study of the Action for Health in Diabetes (Look AHEAD) Trial. Impact of multidomain lifestyle intervention on frailty through the lens of deficit accumulation in adults with type 2 diabetes mellitus. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci 2020;75:1921–1927

94. Espeland MA, Gaussoin SA, Bahnson J, et al. Impact of an 8-year intensive lifestyle intervention on an index of multimorbidity. J Am Geriatr Soc 2020;68:2249–2256

95. Gregg EW, Lin J, Bardenheier B, et al.; Look AHEAD Study Group. Impact of intensive lifestyle intervention on disability-free life expectancy: the Look AHEAD study. Diabetes Care 2018;41:1040–1048

96. Valencia WM, Florez H. Pharmacological treatment of diabetes in older people. Diabetes Obes Metab 2014;16:1192–1203

97. Zhang JX, Bhaumik D, Huang ES, Meltzer DO. Change in insurance status and cost-related medication non-adherence among older U.S. adults with diabetes from 2010 to 2014. J Health Med Econ 2018;4:7

98. Park J, Zhang P, Wang Y, Zhou X, Look KA, Bigman ET. High out-of-pocket health care cost burden among medicare beneficiaries with diabetes, 1999-2017. Diabetes Care 2021;44:1797–1804

99. Patel MR, Resnicow K, Lang I, Kraus K, Heisler M. Solutions to address diabetes-related financial burden and cost-related nonadherence: results from a pilot study. Health Educ Behav 2018;45:101–111

100. Arnold SV, Lipska KJ, Wang J, Seman L, Mehta SN, Kosiborod M. Use of intensive glycemic management in older adults with diabetes mellitus. J Am Geriatr Soc 2018;66:1190–1194

101. Andreassen LM, Sandberg S, Kristensen GBB, Sølvik UØ, Kjome RLS. Nursing home patients with diabetes: prevalence, drug treatment and glycemic control. Diabetes Res Clin Pract 2014;105:102–109

102. Lipska KJ, Ross JS, Miao Y, Shah ND, Lee SJ, Steinman MA. Potential overtreatment of diabetes mellitus in older adults with tight glycemic control. JAMA Intern Med 2015;175:356–362

103. Thorpe CT, Gellad WF, Good CB, et al. Tight glycemic control and use of hypoglycemic medications in older veterans with type 2 diabetes and comorbid dementia. Diabetes Care 2015;38:588–595

104. McAlister FA, Youngson E, Eurich DT. Treatment deintensification is uncommon in adults with type 2 diabetes mellitus: a retrospective cohort study. Circ Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes 2017;10:e003514

105. Seidu S, Kunutsor SK, Topsever P, Hambling CE, Cos FX, Khunti K. Deintensification in older patients with type 2 diabetes: a systematic review of approaches, rates and outcomes. Diabetes Obes Metab 2019;21:1668–1679

106. Weiner JZ, Gopalan A, Mishra P, et al. Use and discontinuation of insulin treatment among adults aged 75 to 79 years with type 2 diabetes. JAMA Intern Med 2019;179:1633–1641

107. Abdelhafiz AH, Sinclair AJ. Deintensification of hypoglycaemic medications-use of a systematic review approach to highlight safety concerns in older adults.

---

diabetesjournals.org/care                                                                                                                                                    Older Adults  S281

older people with type 2 diabetes. J Diabetes                      for the Study of Diabetes (EASD). Diabetes Care                  139.   Heise T, Nosek L, Rønn BB, et al. Lower
Complications 2018;32:444–450                                      2018;41:2669–2701                                                within-subject variability of insulin detemir in
108.   Sussman JB, Kerr EA, Saini SD, et al. Rates                 123.   Karagiannis T, Tsapas A, Athanasiadou E,                  comparison to NPH insulin and insulin glargine in
of   deintensiﬁcation        of   blood     pressure     and       et al. GLP-1 receptor agonists and SGLT2 inhibitors              people with type 1 diabetes. Diabetes 2004;53:
glycemic medication treatment based on levels                      for older people with type 2 diabetes: a systematic              1614–1620
of control and life expectancy in older patients                   review and meta-analysis. Diabetes Res Clin Pract                140.   Larsen      AB,    Hermann        M,     Graue      M.
with diabetes mellitus. JAMA Intern Med 2015;                      2021;174:108737                                                  Continuous glucose monitoring in older people
175:1942–1949                                                      124.   Husain M, Birkenfeld AL, Donsmark M,                      with diabetes receiving home care—a feasibility
109.   Munshi MN, Slyne C, Segal AR, Saul N,                       et al.; PIONEER 6 Investigators. Oral semaglutide                study. Pilot Feasibility Stud 2021;7:12
Lyons C, Weinger K. Simpliﬁcation of insulin                       and cardiovascular outcomes in patients with                     141.   Fløde M, Hermann M, Haugstvedt A, et al.
regimen in older adults and risk of hypoglycemia.                  type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med 2019;381:841–851                   High number of hypoglycaemic episodes identiﬁed
JAMA Intern Med 2016;176:1023–1025                                 125.   Karagiannis T, Malandris K, Avgerinos I,                  by CGM among home-dwelling older people with
110.   Jude EB, Malecki MT, Gomez Huelgas R,                       et al. Subcutaneously administered tirzepatide vs                diabetes: an observational study in Norway. BMC
et al. Expert panel guidance and narrative review                  semaglutide for adults with type 2 diabetes: a                   Endocr Disord 2023;23:218
of treatment simpliﬁcation of complex insulin                      systematic review and network meta-analysis of                   142.   Idrees T, Castro-Revoredo IA, Oh HD, et al.
regimens to improve outcomes in type 2 diabetes.                   randomised controlled trials. Diabetologia 2024;                 Continuous       glucose    monitoring-guided         insulin
Diabetes Ther 2022;13:619–634                                      67:1206–1222                                                     administration      in   long-term      care    facilities:  a
111.   Orloff J, Min JY, Mushlin A, Flory J. Safety                126.   Zinman B, Wanner C, Lachin JM, et al.;                    randomized clinical trial. J Am Med Dir Assoc 2024;
and effectiveness of metformin in patients with                    EMPA-REG OUTCOME Investigators. Empagliﬂozin,                    25:884–888
reduced renal function: a systematic review.                       cardiovascular outcomes, and mortality in type 2                 143.   Munshi MN, Florez H, Huang ES, et al.
Diabetes Obes Metab 2021;23:2035–2047                              diabetes. N Engl J Med 2015;373:2117–2128                        Management of diabetes in long-term care and
112.   Aroda VR, Edelstein SL, Goldberg RB, et al.;                127.   Neal B, Perkovic V, Mahaffey KW, et al.;                  skilled nursing facilities: a position statement of
Diabetes Prevention Program Research Group.                        CANVAS Program Collaborative Group. Canagliﬂozin                 the   American      Diabetes      Association.     Diabetes
Long-term      metformin       use    and    vitamin     B12       and cardiovascular and renal events in type 2                    Care 2016;39:308–318
deﬁciency in the Diabetes Prevention Program                       diabetes. N Engl J Med 2017;377:644–657                          144.   Sloane      PD,    Pandya       N.    Individualizing
Outcomes Study. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2016;                      128. Wiviott      SD,    Raz    I, Bonaca      MP,   et   al.;   diabetes care in older persons with multimorbidity.
101:1754–1761                                                      DECLARE–TIMI 58 Investigators. Dapagliﬂozin and                  J Am Med Dir Assoc 2021;22:1884–1888
113.   Schwartz AV, Chen H, Ambrosius WT, et al.                   cardiovascular outcomes in type 2 diabetes. N Engl               145.   Sinclair A, Morley JE, Rodriguez-Ma~nas L,
Effects   of   TZD     use   and     discontinuation       on      J Med 2019;380:347–357                                           et al. Diabetes mellitus in older people: position
fracture rates in ACCORD bone study. J Clin                        129.   Lunati ME, Cimino V, Gandolﬁ                A, et al.     statement on behalf of the International Association
Endocrinol Metab 2015;100:4059–4066                                SGLT2-inhibitors are effective and safe in the                   of Gerontology and Geriatrics (IAGG), the European
114.   Billington EO, Grey A, Bolland MJ. The                      elderly: the SOLD study. Pharmacol Res 2022;                     Diabetes      Working       Party    for   Older      People
effect   of   thiazolidinediones      on    bone    mineral        183:106396                                                       (EDWPOP), and the International Task Force of
density and bone turnover: systematic review                       130.   Scheen AJ, Bonnet F. Efﬁcacy and safety                   Experts in Diabetes. J Am Med Dir Assoc 2012;
and meta-analysis. Diabetologia 2015;58:2238–                      proﬁle of SGLT2 inhibitors in the elderly: how is                13:497–502
2246                                                               the beneﬁt/risk balance? Diabetes Metab 2023;                    146.   Dorner     B,   Friedrich     EK,   Posthauer     ME.
115. Tramontana F, Napoli N, Litwack-Harrison                      49:101419                                                        Practice paper of the American Dietetic Association:
S, et al. More rapid bone mineral density loss in                  131.   Lin   DS-H,     Lee    J-K,  Chen     W-J.    Clinical    individualized nutrition approaches for older adults
older men with diabetes: the Osteoporotic Fractures                adverse events associated with sodium-glucose                    in health care communities. J Am Diet Assoc
in Men (MrOS) study. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2024;                 cotransporter 2 inhibitors: a meta-analysis involving            2010;110:1554–1563
116.   Napoli N, Strotmeyer ES, Ensrud KE, et al.                  10 randomized clinical trials and 71 553 individuals.            147.   Migdal A, Yarandi SS, Smiley D, Umpierrez
Fracture risk in diabetic elderly men: the MrOS                    J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2021;106:2133–2145                       GE. Update on diabetes in the elderly and in
study. Diabetologia 2014;57:2057–2065                              132.   Krepostman N, Kramer H. Lower urinary tract               nursing home residents. J Am Med Dir Assoc
117.   2023     American      Geriatrics    Society    Beers       symptoms should be queried when initiating sodium                2011;12:627–632.e622
Criteria Expert Panel. American Geriatrics Society                 glucose co-transporter 2 inhibitors. Kidney360 2021;             148.   Pasquel FJ, Powell W, Peng L, et al. A
2023 updated AGS Beers Criteria for potentially                    2:751–754                                                        randomized controlled trial comparing treatment
inappropriate medication use in older adults. J                    133.   Ata F, Yousaf Z, Khan AA, et al. SGLT-2                   with oral agents and basal insulin in elderly
Am Geriatr Soc 2023;71:2052–2081                                   inhibitors associated euglycemic and hyperglycemic               patients with type 2 diabetes in long-term care
118.   Parekh TM, Raji M, Lin Y-L, Tan A, Kuo Y-F,                 DKA in a multicentric cohort. Sci Rep 2021;11:                   facilities. BMJ Open Diabetes Res Care 2015;3:
Goodwin JS. Hypoglycemia after antimicrobial                       10293                                                            e000104
drug    prescription       for   older    patients     using       134.   Bradley MC, Chillarige Y, Lee H, et al. Severe            149.   Quinn K, Hudson P, Dunning T. Diabetes
sulfonylureas.      JAMA      Intern    Med      2014;174:         hypoglycemia risk with long-acting insulin analogs               management in patients receiving palliative care.
1605–1612                                                          vs neutral protamine Hagedorn insulin. JAMA                      J Pain Symptom Manage 2006;32:275–286
119.   Lee S, Ock M, Kim H-S, Kim H. Effects of co-                Intern Med 2021;181:598–607                                      150.   Kutner JS, Blatchford PJ, Taylor DH, Jr, et al.
administration of sulfonylureas and antimicrobial                  135.   Diabetes      Management          Writing     Group.      Safety and beneﬁt of discontinuing statin therapy
drugs on hypoglycemia in patients with type 2                      Clinical   practice    guideline     for   diabetes    man-      in the setting of advanced, life-limiting illness:
diabetes using a case-crossover design. Pharma-                    agement in the post-acute and long-term care                     a randomized clinical trial. JAMA Intern Med
cotherapy 2020;40:902–912                                          setting. J Am Med Dir Assoc 2024;25:105342                       2015;175:691–700
120.   Pilla   SJ,   Pitts  SI,   Maruthur      NM.     High       136.   Livingstone SJ, Levin D, Looker HC, et al.;               151.   Dunning T, Martin P. Palliative and end of life
concurrent use of sulfonylureas and antimicrobials                 Scottish Renal Registry. Estimated life expectancy               care of people with diabetes: issues, challenges
with drug interactions causing hypoglycemia. J                     in a Scottish cohort with type 1 diabetes, 2008-                 and strategies. Diabetes Res Clin Pract 2018;143:
Patient Saf 2022;18:e217–e224                                      2010. JAMA 2015;313:37–44                                        454–463
121.   Bilal A, Yi F, Gonzalez GR, et al. Effects of               137.   Miller RG, Secrest AM, Sharma RK, Songer TJ,              152.   Bouc¸a-Machado R, Ros ario M, Alarc~ao J,
newer anti-hyperglycemic agents on cardiovascular                  Orchard TJ. Improvements in the life expectancy of               Correia-Guedes L, Abreu D, Ferreira JJ. Clinical
outcomes in older adults: systematic review and                    type 1 diabetes: the Pittsburgh Epidemiology of                  trials in palliative care: a systematic review of their
meta-analysis. J Diabetes Complications 2024;38:                   Diabetes     Complications      study   cohort.    Diabetes      methodological characteristics and of the quality
108783                                                             2012;61:2987–2992                                                of their reporting. BMC Palliat Care 2017;16:10
122.   Davies MJ, D'Alessio DA, Fradkin J, et al.                  138.   Bullard KM, Cowie CC, Lessem SE, et al.                   153.   Sheppard       JP,  Burt    J,  Lown     M,    et  al.;
Management of hyperglycemia in type 2 diabetes,                    Prevalence of diagnosed diabetes in adults by                    OPTIMISE Investigators. Effect of antihypertensive
2018. a consensus report by the American Diabetes                  diabetes type - United States, 2016. MMWR                        medication reduction vs usual care on short-term
Association (ADA) and the European Association                     Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2018;67:359–361                             blood pressure control in patients with hypertension

---

# Older Adults

# Diabetes Care

# Volume 48, Supplement 1, January 2025

aged 80 years and older: the OPTIMISE randomized clinical trial. JAMA 2020;323:2039–2051

154. Ford-Dunn S, Smith A, Quin J. Management of diabetes during the last days of life: attitudes of consultant diabetologists and consultant palliative care physicians in the UK. Palliat Med 2006;20:197–203

155. Petrillo LA, Gan S, Jing B, Lang-Brown S, Boscardin WJ, Lee SJ. Hypoglycemia in hospice patients with type 2 diabetes in a national sample of nursing homes. JAMA Intern Med 2018;178:713–715

156. Mallery LH, Ransom T, Steeves B, Cook B, Dunbar P, Moorhouse P. Evidence-informed guidelines for treating frail older adults with type 2 diabetes. J Am Med Dir Assoc 2013;14:801–808

157. Dunning TL. Palliative and end-of-life care: vital aspects of holistic diabetes care of older people with diabetes. Diabetes Spectr 2020;33:246–254

158. Savage S, Duggan N, Dunning T, Martin P. The experiences and care preferences of people with diabetes at the end of life: a qualitative study. Journal of Hospice & Palliative Nursing 2012;14:293–302

159. University of Edinburgh. SPICT Supportive and Palliative Care Indicators Tool. Accessed 31 August 2024 Available from https://www.spict.org.uk/the-spict

160. Royal College of General Practitioners. The Gold Standards Framework Proactive Identification Guidance (PIG). Accessed 31 August 2024 Available from https://goldstandardsframework.org.uk/cd-content/uploads/files/PIG/Proactive%20Identification%20Guidance%20v7%20(2022).pdf

161. Munshi MN, Slyne C, Segal AR, Saul N, Lyons C, Weinger K. Liberating A1C goals in older adults may not protect against the risk of hypoglycemia. J Diabetes Complications 2017;31:1197–1199

Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/48/Supplement_1/S266/791479/dc25s013.pdf by guest on 16 December 2024

---

