# Diabetes Care

# Volume 48, Supplement 1, January 2025

# S59

# 4. Comprehensive Medical

# American Diabetes Association

# Professional Practice Committee*

# Evaluation and Assessment of Comorbidities: Standards of Care in Diabetes—2025

Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/48/Supplement_1/S59/791510/dc25s004.pdf by guest on 16 December 2024

Diabetes Care 2025;48(Suppl. 1):S59–S85 | https://doi.org/10.2337/dc25-S004

# 4. MEDICAL EVALUATION AND COMORBIDITIES

The American Diabetes Association (ADA) “Standards of Care in Diabetes” includes the ADA’s current clinical practice recommendations and is intended to provide the components of diabetes care, general treatment goals and guidelines, and tools to evaluate quality of care. Members of the ADA Professional Practice Committee, an interprofessional expert committee, are responsible for updating the Standards of Care annually, or more frequently as warranted. For a detailed description of ADA standards, statements, and reports, as well as the evidence-grading system for ADA’s clinical practice recommendations and a full list of Professional Practice Committee members, please refer to Introduction and Methodology. Readers who wish to comment on the Standards of Care are invited to do so at professional.diabetes.org/SOC.

# PERSON-CENTERED COLLABORATIVE CARE

# Recommendations

4.1 A communication style that uses person-centered, culturally sensitive, and strength-based language and active listening; elicits individual preferences and beliefs; and assesses literacy, numeracy, and potential barriers to care should be used to optimize health outcomes and health-related quality of life. B

4.2 People with diabetes can benefit from a coordinated interprofessional team that may include but is not limited to diabetes care and education specialists, primary care and subspecialty clinicians, nurses, registered dietitian nutritionists, exercise specialists, pharmacists, dentists, podiatrists, and behavioral health professionals. C

A successful medical evaluation depends on beneficial interactions and care coordination between the person with diabetes and the care team (1). The Chronic Care Model (2–4) (see Section 1, “Improving Care and Promoting Health in Populations”) is a person-centered approach to care that requires a close working relationship between the person with diabetes and clinicians involved in treatment planning. People with diabetes should receive health care from a coordinated interprofessional team that may include but is not limited to diabetes care and education specialists, primary care and subspecialty clinicians, nurses, registered dietitian nutritionists, exercise specialists, pharmacists, dentists, podiatrists, behavioral health professionals, and community partners such as community health workers and community paramedics. Individuals with diabetes and their care partners must assume an active role in their care. Based on the preferences and values of the person with diabetes, elicited by the care team, the person with diabetes, their family or support group, and the health care team together formulate the management plan, which includes lifestyle management (see Section 5).

* A complete list of members of the American Diabetes Association Professional Practice Committee can be found at https://doi.org/10.2337/dc25-SINT. Duality of interest information for each author is available at https://doi.org/10.2337/dc25-SDIS.

Suggested citation: American Diabetes Association Professional Practice Committee. 4. Comprehensive medical evaluation and assessment of comorbidities: Standards of Care in Diabetes—2025. Diabetes Care 2025;48(Suppl. 1):S59–S85.

The BONE HEALTH subsection has received endorsement from the American Society for Bone and Mineral Research.

© 2024 by the American Diabetes Association. Readers may use this article as long as the work is properly cited, the use is educational and not for profit, and the work is not altered. More information is available at https://www.diabetesjournals.org/journals/pages/license.

---

# Comprehensive Medical Evaluation and Assessment of Comorbidities

# Diabetes Care Volume 48, Supplement 1, January 2025

“Facilitating Positive Health Behaviors with routine reassessment as necessary diabetes in “following doctor’s orders,” and Well-being to Improve Health Outcomes”) and pharmacotherapy, as appropriate.

The goals of treatment for diabetes are to prevent or delay complications and optimize quality of life (Fig. 4.1). Treatment goals and plans should be co-created by the care team and people with diabetes based on their individual preferences, values, and goals. This individualized management plan should take into account the person’s age, cognitive abilities, school/work schedule and conditions, health beliefs, support systems, eating patterns, physical activity, social situation, financial concerns, cultural factors, literacy and numeracy (mathematical literacy), diabetes history (duration, complications, and current use of medications), comorbidities, disabilities, health priorities, other medical conditions, preferences for care, access to health care services, and life expectancy.

People living with diabetes should be engaged in conversation about these aspects of their lives and diabetes management. Communication by health care professionals with people with diabetes and their families should acknowledge that multiple factors impact glycemic management but also emphasize that collaboratively developed treatment plans and a healthy lifestyle can significantly improve disease outcomes and well-being (5–10). Thus, the goal of communication between health care professionals and people with diabetes is to establish a collaborative relationship and to assess and address self-management barriers without blaming people with diabetes for “noncompliance” or “nonadherence” when the outcomes of self-management are not optimal (11).

The familiar terms noncompliance and nonadherence denote a passive, obedient role for a person with diabetes, while empowering language can help to inform and motivate, while shame and judgement can be detrimental.

# Decision Cycle for Person-Centered Glycemic Management in Type 2 Diabetes

- Review management plan
- Mutually agree on changes
- Ensure agreed modification of therapy is implemented in a timely fashion to avoid therapeutic inertia
- Undertake decision cycle regularly (at least once or twice a year)
- Operate in an integrated system of care

# Considerations

- The individual’s priorities
- Current lifestyle and health behaviors
- Comorbidities (i.e., CVD, CKD, and HF)
- Clinical characteristics (i.e., age, A1C, and weight)
- Issues such as motivation, depression, and cognition
- Social determinants of health

# Goals of Care

- Individualized glycemic and weight goals
- Impact on weight, hypoglycemia, and cardiovascular and kidney protection
- Emotional well-being
- Lifestyle and health behaviors
- Tolerability of medications
- Prevent complications
- Optimize quality of life
- Underlying physiological factors
- Side effect profiles of medications
- Complexity of treatment plan (i.e., frequency, and mode of administration)
- Treatment choice to optimize medication use and reduce treatment discontinuation
- Access, cost, availability of medication, and lifestyle choices

# Regular Review

Ensure there is regular review; more frequent contact initially is often desirable for DSMES.

# SMART Goals

- Specific
- Measurable
- Achievable
- Realistic
- Time-limited

# Additional Considerations

- Ensure access to DSMES
- Involve an educated and informed person (and the individual’s family or caregiver)
- Explore personal preferences
- Language matters (include person-first, strengths-based, empowering language)
- Include motivational interviewing, goal setting, and shared decision-making

Figure 4.1—Decision cycle for person-centered glycemic management in type 2 diabetes. BGM, blood glucose monitoring; BP, blood pressure; CGM, continuous glucose monitoring; CKD, chronic kidney disease; CVD, cardiovascular disease; DSMES, diabetes self-management education and support; HF, heart failure. Adapted from Davies et al. (324).

---

# Comprehensive Medical Evaluation and Assessment of Comorbidities

discouraging. The American Diabetes Association (ADA) and the Association of Diabetes Care & Education Specialists (ADCES) (formerly called the American Association of Diabetes Educators) joint consensus report, “The Use of Language in Diabetes Care and Education,” provides the authors’ expert opinion regarding the use of language by health care professionals when speaking or writing about diabetes for people with diabetes or for professional audiences (15). Although further research is needed to address the impact of language on diabetes outcomes, the report includes five key consensus recommendations for language use:

- Use language that is neutral, non-judgmental, and based on facts, actions, physiology, or biology.
- Use language free from stigma.
- Use language that is strength based, respectful, and inclusive and that imparts hope.
- Use language that fosters collaboration between people with diabetes and health care professionals.
- Use language that is person centered (e.g., “person with diabetes” is preferred over “diabetic”).

The comprehensive medical evaluation includes the initial and follow-up evaluations, which comprise assessment of complications, psychosocial assessment, management of comorbid conditions, overall health, functional and cognitive status, and engagement of the person with diabetes throughout the process. While a comprehensive list is provided in Table 4.1, in clinical practice the health care professional may need to prioritize the components of the medical evaluation given the available resources and time. Engaging other members of the health care team can also support comprehensive diabetes care. The goal of these recommendations is to provide the health care team information so it can optimally support people with diabetes and their care partners. In addition to the medical history, physical examination, and laboratory tests, health care professionals should assess diabetes self-management behaviors, nutrition, social determinants of health, and psychosocial health (see Section 5, “Facilitating Positive Health Behaviors and Well-being to Improve Health Outcomes”) and give guidance on routine immunizations. The assessment of sleep pattern and duration should also be considered, as this may affect glycemic management. Interval follow-up visits should occur at least every 3–6 months individualized to the person and then at least annually.

# Recommendations

4.3 A complete medical evaluation should be performed at the initial visit and follow-up, as appropriate, to:

- Confirm the diagnosis and classify diabetes.
- Assess glycemic status and previous treatment.
- Evaluate for diabetes complications, potential comorbid conditions, and overall health status.
- Identify care partners and support system.
- Assess social determinants of health and structural barriers to optimal health and health care.
- Review risk factor management in the person with diabetes.
- Begin engagement with the person with diabetes in the formulation of a care management plan including initial goals of care.
- Develop a plan for continuing care.

4.4 Ongoing management should be guided by the assessment of overall health and functional status, diabetes complications, cardiovascular risk, hypoglycemia risk, and shared decision-making to set therapeutic goals. Additional referrals should be arranged as necessary (Table 4.2). Clinicians should ensure that people with diabetes are appropriately screened for complications, comorbidities, and treatment burden. Discussing and implementing an approach to glycemic management with the person is a part, not the sole goal, of the clinical encounter.

# IMMUNIZATIONS

Recommendation 4.5 Provide routinely recommended vaccinations for children and adults with diabetes as indicated by age (see Table 4.3). Children and adults with diabetes should receive vaccinations according to age-appropriate recommendations (16,17). The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) provides vaccination schedules specifically for children, adolescents, and adults with diabetes (cdc.gov/vaccines/). The CDC Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP) makes recommendations based on its own review and rating of the evidence, provided in Table 4.3 for selected vaccinations. The ACIP evidence review has evolved over time with the adoption of Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development, and Evaluation (GRADE) in 2010 and then the Evidence to Decision or Evidence to Recommendation frameworks in 2020 (18). Here, we discuss the particular importance of specific vaccines.

# COVID-19

People with underlying medical conditions, including diabetes, are more likely to become severely ill with coronavirus.

---

S62       Comprehensive Medical Evaluation and Assessment of Comorbidities                                             Diabetes Care Volume 48, Supplement 1, January 2025

Table 4.1—Components of the comprehensive diabetes medical evaluation at initial, follow-up, and annual visits

| | Visit | | |
|---|---|---|---|
| | Initial | Every follow-up | Annual |
| Past medical and family history | | | |
| Diabetes history | | | |
| • Characteristics at onset (e.g., age and symptoms and/or signs) | ✓ | | |
| • Review of previous treatment plans and response | ✓ | | |
| • Assess frequency, cause, and severity of past hospitalizations | ✓ | | |
| Family history | | | |
| • Family history of diabetes in a first-degree relative | ✓ | | |
| • Family history of autoimmune disorders | ✓ | | |
| Personal history of complications and common comorbidities | | | |
| • Common comorbidities (e.g., obesity, OSA, and MASLD) | ✓ | | ✓ |
| • High blood pressure or abnormal lipids | ✓ | | ✓ |
| • Macrovascular and microvascular complications | ✓ | | ✓ |
| • Hypoglycemia: awareness, frequency, causes, and timing of episodes | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ |
| • Presence of hemoglobinopathies or anemias | ✓ | | ✓ |
| • Last dental visit | ✓ | | ✓ |
| • Last dilated eye exam | ✓ | | ✓ |
| • Visits to specialists | | | ✓ |
| • Disability assessment and use of assistive devices (e.g., physical, cognitive, vision and auditory, history of fractures, and podiatry) | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ |
| • Personal history of autoimmune disease | ✓ | | |
| Surgical and procedure history | | | |
| • Surgeries (e.g., metabolic surgery and transplantation) | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ |
| Interval history | | | |
| • Changes in medical or family history since last visit | | ✓ | ✓ |
| Behavioral factors | | | |
| • Eating patterns and weight history | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ |
| • Assess familiarity with carbohydrate counting (e.g., type 1 diabetes or type 2 diabetes treated with MDI) | ✓ | | ✓ |
| • Physical activity and sleep behaviors; screen for OSA | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ |
| • Tobacco, alcohol, and substance use | ✓ | | ✓ |
| Medications and vaccinations | | | |
| • Current medication plan | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ |
| • Medication-taking behavior, including rationing of medications and/or medical equipment | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ |
| • Medication intolerance or side effects | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ |
| • Complementary and alternative medicine use | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ |
| • Vaccination history and needs | ✓ | | ✓ |
| Technology use | | | |
| • Assess use of health apps, online education, patient portals, etc. | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ |
| • Glucose monitoring (meter/CGM): results and data use | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ |

Continued on p. S63

disease 2019 (COVID-19). COVID-19 vaccination using an appropriate number of doses of updated vaccines is recommended for everyone aged 6 months and older in the U.S. (18).

Hepatitis B
Compared with the general population, people with type 1 or type 2 diabetes have higher rates of hepatitis. Because of the higher likelihood of transmission of the disease, hepatitis B vaccine is recommended for adults with diabetes aged <60 years. For adults aged ≥60 years, hepatitis B vaccine may be administered at the discretion of the treating clinician based on the person's likelihood of acquiring hepatitis B infection (19).

Influenza
Influenza is a common, preventable infectious disease associated with high mortality and morbidity in vulnerable populations, including youth, older adults, and people with chronic diseases. Influenza vaccination in people with diabetes has been found to significantly reduce influenza and diabetes-related hospital admissions (20). In people with diabetes, the influenza vaccine has been associated with lower risk of all-cause mortality, cardiovascular mortality, and cardiovascular events (21). Given the benefits of the annual influenza vaccination, it is recommended for all individuals ≥6 months of age who do not have a contraindication. The live attenuated influenza vaccine, which is delivered by nasal spray, is an option for people who are 2-49 years of age and are not pregnant, but people with chronic conditions such as diabetes are cautioned against taking the live attenuated influenza vaccine and are instead recommended to receive the inactive or recombinant influenza vaccination. As of the 2024-2025 season, all influenza vaccines offered in the U.S. are trivalent (22).

Pneumococcal Pneumonia
Like influenza, pneumococcal pneumonia is a common, preventable disease. People with diabetes are at increased risk for pneumococcal infection and have been reported to have a high risk of hospitalization and death, with a mortality rate as high as 50% (23). All people with diabetes should receive one of the CDC-recommended pneumococcal vaccines (24). See details in Table 4.3.

---

| Table 4.1—Continued |
|--------------------------|

| | Visit |
|---|---|---|---|
| | Initial | Every follow-up | Annual |
| • Review insulin pump settings and use and connected pen and glucose data | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ |
| Social life assessment |
| Social network |
| • Identify existing social supports | ✓ | | ✓ |
| • Identify surrogate decision maker and advanced care plan | ✓ | | ✓ |
| • Identify social determinants of health (e.g., food security, housing stability and homelessness, transportation access, financial security, and community safety) | ✓ | | ✓ |
| • Assess daily routine and environment, including school or work schedules and ability to engage in diabetes self-management | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ |
| Physical examination |
| • Height, weight, and BMI; growth and pubertal development in children and adolescents | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ |
| • Blood pressure determination | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ |
| • Orthostatic blood pressure measures (when indicated) | ✓ | | ✓ |
| • Fundoscopic examination (refer to eye specialist) | ✓ | | ✓ |
| • Thyroid palpation | ✓ | | ✓ |
| • Skin examination (e.g., acanthosis nigricans, insulin injection or insertion sites, and lipodystrophy) | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ |
| • Comprehensive foot examination | ✓ | | ✓ |
| • Visual inspection (e.g., skin integrity, callous formation, foot deformity or ulcer, and toenails)* | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ |
| • Check pedal pulses and screen for PAD with ABI testing if a PAD diagnosis would change management | ✓ | | ✓ |
| • Determination of temperature, vibration or pinprick sensation, and 10-g monofilament exam | ✓ | | ✓ |
| • Screen for depression, anxiety, diabetes distress, fear of hypoglycemia, and disordered eating | ✓ | | ✓ |
| • Assessment for cognitive performance if indicated† | ✓ | | ✓ |
| • Assessment for functional performance if indicated† | ✓ | | ✓ |
| • Consider assessment for bone health (e.g., loss of height and kyphosis) | ✓ | | ✓ |
| Laboratory evaluation |
| • A1C, if the results are not available within the past 3 months | ✓ | ✓ | ✓ |
| • Lipid profile, including total, LDL, and HDL cholesterol and triglycerides‡ | ✓ | | ✓^ |
| • Liver function tests (i.e., FIB-4)‡ | ✓ | | ✓ |
| • Spot urinary albumin-to-creatinine ratio | ✓ | | ✓ |
| • Serum creatinine and estimated glomerular filtration rate§ | ✓ | | ✓ |
| • Thyroid-stimulating hormone in people with type 1 diabetes‡ | ✓ | | ✓ |
| • Celiac disease in people with type 1 diabetes‖ | ✓ | | |

Continued on p. S64

Respiratory Syncytial Virus
Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) is a cause of respiratory illness in some individuals, including older adults. People with chronic conditions such as diabetes have a higher risk of severe illness. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved the first vaccines for prevention of RSV-associated lower respiratory tract disease in adults aged ≥60 years. On 26 June 2024, ACIP voted to recommend that all adults aged ≥75 years and adults aged 60–74 years who are at increased risk for severe RSV should receive a single dose of RSV vaccine (25).

ASSESSMENT OF COMORBIDITIES

Besides assessing diabetes-related complications, clinicians and people with diabetes need to be aware of common comorbidities that affect people with diabetes and that may complicate management (26–28). Diabetes comorbidities are conditions that affect people with diabetes more often than age-matched people without diabetes. This section discusses many of the common comorbidities observed in people with diabetes but is not necessarily inclusive of all the conditions that have been reported.

Autoimmune Diseases

Recommendations
4.6 Screen people with type 1 diabetes for autoimmune thyroid disease soon after diagnosis and thereafter at repeated intervals if clinically indicated. B
4.7 Adults with type 1 diabetes should be screened for celiac disease in the presence of gastrointestinal symptoms, signs, laboratory manifestations, or clinical suspicion suggestive of celiac disease. B

People with type 1 diabetes are at increased risk for other autoimmune diseases, with thyroid disease, celiac disease, and pernicious anemia (vitamin B12 deficiency) being among the most common (29). Other autoimmune conditions associated with type 1 diabetes include autoimmune liver disease, primary adrenal insufficiency (Addison disease), vitiligo, collagen vascular diseases, and myasthenia gravis (30–33). Type 1 diabetes may also occur with other autoimmune diseases in the context of specific genetic

---

S64      Comprehensive Medical Evaluation and Assessment of Comorbidities                                           Diabetes Care     Volume 48, Supplement 1, January 2025

Table 4.1—Continued

| | Visit |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| | Initial | Every follow-up | Annual |
| • Vitamin B12 if taking metformin for >5 years | ✓ | | ✓ |
| • CBC with platelets | ✓ | | ✓ |
| • Serum potassium levels in people with diabetes on ACE inhibitors, ARBs, or diuretics§ | ✓ | | ✓ |
| • Calcium, vitamin D, and phosphorous for appropriate people with diabetes | ✓ | | ✓ |

ABI, ankle brachial index; ARBs, angiotensin receptor blockers; CBC, complete blood count; CGM, continuous glucose monitor; FIB-4: fibrosis-4 index; MASLD, metabolic-associated steatotic liver disease; MDI, multiple daily injections; OSA, obstructive sleep apnea; PAD, peripheral arterial disease. *Should be performed at every visit in people with diabetes with sensory loss, previous foot ulcers, or amputations. †At 65 years of age or older. ‡May also need to be checked after initiation or dose changes of medications that affect these laboratory values (i.e., diabetes medications, blood pressure medications, cholesterol medications, or thyroid medications). ^In people without dyslipidemia and not on cholesterol-lowering therapy, testing may be less frequent. §May be needed more frequently in people with diabetes with known chronic kidney disease or with changes in medications that affect kidney function and serum potassium (see Table 11.2). ||In people with presence of gastrointestinal symptoms, signs, laboratory manifestations, or clinical suspicion suggestive of celiac disease.

disorders such as polyglandular autoimmune syndromes (34). Given the high prevalence, nonspecific symptoms, and insidious onset of primary hypothyroidism, routine screening for thyroid dysfunction is recommended for all people with type 1 diabetes. Screening for celiac disease should be considered in adults with diabetes with suggestive symptoms (e.g., diarrhea, malabsorption, and abdominal pain) or signs (e.g., osteoporosis, vitamin deficiencies, and iron deficiency anemia) (35,36). Measurement of vitamin B12 levels should be considered for people with type 1 diabetes and peripheral neuropathy or unexplained anemia.

Bone Health

Recommendations
4.8 Assess fracture risk in older adults with diabetes as a part of routine care in diabetes clinical practice, according to risk factors and comorbidities. A
4.9 Monitor bone mineral density using dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry in older adults with diabetes (aged ≥65 years) and younger individuals with diabetes and multiple risk factors every 2–3 years (Table 4.4). A
4.10 Consider the potential adverse impact on skeletal health when selecting pharmacological options to lower glucose levels in people with diabetes. Avoiding medications with

a known association with higher fracture risk (e.g., thiazolidinediones and sulfonylureas) is recommended, particularly for those at elevated risk for fractures. B
4.11 To reduce the risk of falls and fractures, glycemic management goals should be individualized for people with diabetes at a higher risk of fracture. C Prioritize use of glucose-lowering medications that are associated with low risk for hypoglycemia to avoid falls. B
4.12 Advise people with diabetes on their intake of calcium (1,000–1,200 mg/day) and vitamin D to ensure it meets the recommended daily allowance for those at risk for fracture, either through their diet or supplemental means. B
4.13 Antiresorptive medications and osteoanabolic agents should be recommended for older adults with diabetes who are at higher risk of fracture, including those with low bone mineral density with a T-score ≤−2.0, history of fragility fracture, or elevated Fracture Risk Assessment Tool score (≥3% for hip fracture or ≥20% for major osteoporotic fracture). B

Determination of fracture risk traditionally has relied on measurements of bone mineral density (BMD) and the World Health

Organization–defined T-score of ≤−2.5 SD. However, it is now established that the consideration of other risk factors improves the categorization of fracture risk (Table 4.4). There are factors beyond BMD that contribute to bone strength in people with diabetes.

A low-trauma hip/pelvis, vertebral, or forearm fracture in people aged ≥65 years is diagnostic for osteoporosis independent of BMD and is one of the strongest risk factors for subsequent fractures, especially in the first 1–2 years after a fracture (37,38). Osteoporotic hip fractures are associated with significant morbidity, mortality, and societal costs (39). It is estimated that 20% of individuals do not survive to 1 year after hip fracture, while 60% do not regain their prior functionality, living with permanent disability (40).

Hip fractures in people with diabetes are associated with higher risk of mortality (28% in women and 57% in men), longer recovery, and delayed healing (41) compared with individuals without diabetes.

Epidemiology and Risk Factors
Age-specific fracture risk is significantly increased in people with type 1 or type 2 diabetes in both sexes, with a 34% increase in fracture risk compared with those without diabetes (42).

Type 1 Diabetes. Fracture risk in people with type 1 diabetes is increased by 4.35 times for hip fractures, 1.83 times for upper limb fractures, and 1.97 times for ankle fractures (43). Fractures occur even at young ages, 10–15 years earlier than they do in people without diabetes, and are less frequent at the vertebral level. Type 1 diabetes is often associated with low bone mass, although BMD underestimates the high risk of fracture observed in young individuals (43). Risk of fracture is increased in people with type 1 diabetes with microvascular complications or neuropathy (41). Moreover, average A1C >7.9% (risk ratio [RR] 3.57 [CI 1.08–11.78]), duration of diabetes >26 years (RR 7.6 [CI 1.67–34.6]), and family history of fractures (RR 2.64 [CI 1.15–6.09]) have been independently associated with high risk of nonvertebral fractures (44).

Type 2 Diabetes. In people with type 2 diabetes, even with normal or higher BMD, hip fracture risk is increased by 1.79 times, and risk throughout life is 40–70%

---

# Comprehensive Medical Evaluation and Assessment of Comorbidities

# Table 4.2—Essential components for assessment, planning, and referral

Assessing risk of diabetes complicationsASCVD and heart failure historyASCVD risk factors and 10-year ASCVD risk assessmentStaging of chronic kidney disease (see Table 11.2)Hypoglycemia risk (see Section 6, “Glycemic Targets and Hypoglycemia Prevention”)Assessment for retinopathyAssessment for neuropathyAssessment for MASLD and MASH
# Goal setting

Set A1C, blood glucose, and time in range goalsSet lipid goalIf hypertension is present, establish blood pressure goalWeight management and physical activity goalsDiabetes self-management goals
# Therapeutic treatment plans

Lifestyle management (e.g., registered dietitian nutritionist)Pharmacologic therapy: glucose loweringPharmacologic therapy: cardiovascular and kidney disease risk factorsWeight management with pharmacotherapy or metabolic surgery, as appropriateUse of glucose monitoring and insulin delivery devicesReferral to diabetes education and medical specialists (as needed)
# Referrals for initial care management

Eye care professional for annual dilated eye examFamily planning for individuals of childbearing potentialRegistered dietitian nutritionist for medical nutrition therapyDiabetes self-management education and supportDentist for comprehensive dental and periodontal examinationBehavioral health professional, if indicatedAudiology, if indicatedSocial worker and community resources, if indicatedRehabilitation medicine or another relevant health care professional for physical and cognitive disability evaluation, if indicatedOther appropriate health care professionals
Assessment and treatment planning are essential components of initial and all follow-up visits. ASCVD, atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease; MASH, metabolic dysfunction–associated steatohepatitis; MASLD, metabolic dysfunction–associated steatotic liver disease.

Higher than in it is in individuals without diabetes. According to a meta-analysis that included 15 studies, people with type 2 diabetes had a 35% higher incidence of vertebral fractures, causing increased risk of mortality (HR 2.11 [95% CI 1.72–2.59]). Fracture risk is also increased in the upper limbs and ankle. However, bone loss is accelerated, and low BMD remains an independent risk factor for fractures.

Glycemic management significantly impacts fracture risk in people with diabetes. A meta-analysis revealed an 8% increased fracture risk per 1% rise in A1C level (RR 1.08 [95% CI 1.03–1.14]). Poor glycemic management (A1C >9%) over 2 years in individuals with type 2 diabetes correlated with a 29% heightened fracture risk. Notably, this risk was higher among White individuals than in other racial groups. Hypoglycemia also escalated the risk of fractures at the hip and other skeletal sites.

Notably, the Fracture Risk Assessment Tool (FRAX), although useful, does not factor in type 2 diabetes; an inclusion of the condition is estimated to mirror the effect of either a 10-year age increase or a 0.5 SD reduction in BMD T-score. Fracture risk was higher in large observational studies in participants with diabetes compared with those without diabetes for a given T-score and age or for a given FRAX score.

---

| Vaccine | Recommended ages | Schedule | GRADE evidence type* | References |
|---------|-------------------|----------|------------------------|------------|
| COVID-19 | All people 6 months of age and older | Current initial vaccination and boosters | | Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Interim Clinical Considerations for Use of COVID-19 Vaccines in the United States (318) |
| Hepatitis B | Adults with diabetes aged <60 years; for adults aged ≥60 years, hepatitis B vaccine may be administered at the discretion of the treating clinician based on the person's likelihood of acquiring hepatitis B infection | | | Weng et al., Universal Hepatitis B Vaccination in Adults Aged 19–59 Years: Updated Recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices—United States, 2022 (19) |
| Influenza | All people with diabetes advised to receive a trivalent influenza vaccine and not to receive live attenuated influenza vaccine | Annual | | Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Prevention and Control of Seasonal Influenza with Vaccines: Recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices—United States, 2024–25 Influenza Season (22) |
| Pneumonia (PPSV23 [Pneumovax]) | 19–64 years of age, vaccinate with Pneumovax | One dose is recommended for those who previously received PCV13; if PCV15 was used, follow with PPSV23 ≥1 year later; PPSV23 is not indicated after PCV20; adults who received only PPSV23 may receive PCV15 or PCV20 ≥1 year after their last dose | 2 | Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Updated Recommendations for Prevention of Invasive Pneumococcal Disease Among Adults Using the 23-Valent Pneumococcal Polysaccharide Vaccine (PPSV23) (24,319) |
| | ≥65 years of age | One dose is recommended for those who previously received PCV13; if PCV15 was used, follow with PPSV23 ≥1 year later; PPSV23 is not indicated after PCV20; adults who received only PPSV23 may receive PCV15 or PCV20 ≥1 year after their last dose | 2 | Falkenhorst et al., Effectiveness of the 23-Valent Pneumococcal Polysaccharide Vaccine (PPV23) Against Pneumococcal Disease in the Elderly: Systematic Review and Meta-analysis (24,320) |
| PCV20 or PCV15 | Adults 19–64 years of age with an immunocompromising condition (e.g., chronic renal failure), cochlear implant, or cerebrospinal fluid leak | One dose of PCV15 or PCV20 is recommended by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention | | Kobayashi et al., Use of 15-Valent Pneumococcal Conjugate Vaccine and 20-Valent Pneumococcal Conjugate Vaccine Among U.S. Adults: Updated Recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices—United States, 2022 (24, 321) |
| | Adults 19–64 years of age, immunocompetent | For those who have never received any pneumococcal vaccine, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention recommends one dose of PCV15 or PCV20 | | |
| | ≥65 years of age, immunocompetent, have shared decision-making discussion with health care professionals | One dose of PCV15 or PCV20; PCSV23 may be given ≥8 weeks after PCV15; PPSV23 is not indicated after PCV20 | | |
| RSV | Older adults ≥60 years of age with diabetes appear to be a risk group | Adults aged ≥75 years and those aged ≥60 years and at high risk may receive a single dose of an RSV vaccine | | Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, CDC Recommends RSV Vaccine for Older Adults (25) |
| Tetanus, diphtheria, pertussis (Tdap) | All adults; pregnant individuals should have an extra dose | Booster every 10 years | 2 for effectiveness, 3 for safety | Havers et al., Use of Tetanus Toxoid, Reduced Diphtheria Toxoid, and Acellular Pertussis Vaccines: Updated Recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices—United States, 2019 (322) |

Continued on p. S67

---

Table 4.3—Continued

| Vaccine | Recommended ages | Schedule | GRADE evidence type* | References |
|---------|-------------------|----------|----------------------|------------|
| Zoster  | ≥50 years of age  | Two-dose Shingrix, even if previously vaccinated | 1 | Dooling et al., Recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices for Use of Herpes Zoster Vaccines (323) |

For a comprehensive list of vaccines, refer to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention web site at cdc.gov/vaccines/. Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices recommendations can be found at cdc.gov/vaccines/acip/recommendations. GRADE, Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development, and Evaluation; PCV13, 13-valent pneumococcal conjugate vaccine; PCV15, 15-valent pneumococcal conjugate vaccine; PCV 20, 20-valent pneumococcal conjugate vaccine; PPSV23, 23-valent pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccine. *Evidence type: 1, randomized controlled trials (RCTs) or overwhelming evidence from observational studies; 2, RCTs with important limitations or exceptionally strong evidence from observational studies; 3, observational studies or RCTs with notable limitations; 4, clinical experience and observations, observational studies with important limitations, or RCTs with several major limitations.

individuals with type 1 diabetes and are based on data from the U.S. or Canada.

In people with type 2 diabetes, BMD should be monitored by DXA scan in older adults (aged ≥65 years) in the absence of other comorbidities and in younger individuals (>50 years of age) with bone or diabetes-related risk factors, such as insulin use or diabetes duration >10 years (Table 4.4). Reassessment is recommended every 2–3 years (65), depending on the screening evaluation and the presence of additional risk factors, although the evidence on how frequently DXA should be repeated is less robust. According to the European Association for the Study of Obesity (EASO), DXA should be performed every 2 years in subjects undergoing bariatric-metabolic surgery.

DXA-assisted vertebral fracture assessment is a convenient and low-cost method to assess vertebral fractures, although traditional lateral thoracic/lumbar spine X-ray is still considered the gold standard (68). MRI or computed tomography imaging studies performed for other purposes should be analyzed for presence of vertebral fractures as well as chest X-rays in hospitalized individuals. Bone turnover markers are commonly used in clinical practice to monitor bone formation and bone resorption, although they are suppressed in people with diabetes and have not been shown to predict fracture risk (69).

Type 1 Diabetes. Because hip fracture risk in type 1 diabetes starts to increase after the age of 50, clinicians may consider assessing BMD after the 5th decade of life (43). In people with type 1 diabetes, BMD underestimates fracture risk, but studies do not address the extent of underestimation of fracture risk.

According to the International Society for Pediatric and Adolescent Diabetes (ISPAD), regular assessment of bone health using bone densitometry in youth with type 1 diabetes is still controversial and not recommended, but it may be considered in association with celiac disease (70).

Management

Appropriate glycemic management and minimizing hypoglycemic episodes are crucial for bone health in people with diabetes. Individuals with prolonged disease, microvascular and macrovascular complications, or frequent hypoglycemic episodes face higher fracture risks and fall risks due to factors like poor vision, neuropathy, sarcopenia, and impaired gait. Health care professionals should advocate moderate physical activity to enhance muscle health, gait coordination, and balance as part of fracture preventive strategies (56,57,71).

Aerobic and weight-bearing exercise should be recommended to counteract the potential negative effect of weight loss on bone; specific guidelines have been published for older adults with type 2 diabetes (72).

Osteoporosis and fracture prevention are first based on measures applied to the general population. All people with diabetes should receive an adequate daily intake of proteins, calcium, and vitamin D, stop smoking, and have regular physical activity (73–75).

Intake of calcium should reflect the age-specific recommendations for the general population and should be obtained through diet and/or oral supplements (76).

The optimal level of 25-hydroxyvitamin D is a matter of controversy (77), although serum levels 20–30 ng/mL are generally thought to be sufficient (78).

The safe upper limit is also a matter of debate, and there is substantial disagreement over whether to treat to a specified serum level. In the U.S., the recommended daily allowance of vitamin D is 600 IU for people aged 51–70 years and 800 IU for people aged >70 years (78). In clinical practice, this dose of supplement may not be sufficient to reach recommended serum levels of vitamin D, particularly in those at risk for vitamin D deficiency, and therefore supplementation should be individualized.

Fractures are important determinants of frailty, a predisability condition that should be mitigated with individualized

Table 4.4—Diagnostic assessment

Individuals who should receive BMD testing

People aged ≥65 years

Postmenopausal women and men aged ≥50 years with history of adult-age fracture or with diabetes-specific risk factors:
• Frequent hypoglycemic events
• Diabetes duration >10 years
• Diabetes medications: insulin, thiazolidinediones, sulfonylureas
• A1C >8%
• Peripheral or autonomic neuropathy, retinopathy, nephropathy
• Frequent falls
• Glucocorticoid use

---

# Comprehensive Medical Evaluation and Assessment of Comorbidities

# Diabetes Care

# Volume 48, Supplement 1, January 2025

interventions to prevent falls, maintain mobility, and delay disability (72). In many circumstances, conservative management (calcium, vitamin D, and lifestyle measures) are not enough to reduce fracture risk. When pharmacological treatment is needed, treatment initiation strategies are the same as those used for the general population. Antiosteoporosis medications reduce bone resorption (bisphosphonates, selective estrogen receptor modulators, and denosumab), stimulate bone formation (teriparatide and abaloparatide), or have dual actions by stimulating bone formation and reducing bone resorption (romosozumab). These agents improve bone density and reduce the risk of vertebral and nonvertebral fractures. Although there are no studies specifically designed for people with diabetes, data on antiresorptive and osteoanabolic agents suggest efficacy in type 2 diabetes is similar to that for individuals without diabetes (79–81).

Using individual participant data from randomized trials, antiresorptive therapies show similar effects in people with and without type 2 diabetes for vertebral, hip, and nonvertebral fractures (79). No similar studies of efficacy of antiosteoporosis treatment in people with type 1 diabetes have been published.

# Secondary Prevention of Fragility Fractures

The risk of subsequent fracture in individuals with hip or vertebral fracture is high, especially in the first 1–2 years after a fracture. Antiosteoporosis treatment reduces the risk of fracture in older individuals with prior hip or vertebral fracture.

As in the general population, people with diabetes who experience fragility fracture should 1) be given the diagnosis of osteoporosis regardless of DXA data and 2) receive the appropriate work-up and therapy to prevent future fractures (85). Individuals on long-term treatment with antiosteoporosis medications, with multiple fragility fractures, or with multiple comorbidities should be referred to a bone metabolic specialist. In these more complicated cases, a bone specialist may choose to initiate an osteoanabolic agent to optimize bone formation and reduce immediate fracture risk (86).

Denosumab is preferred in individuals with estimated glomerular filtration rate <30–35 mL/min/1.73 m², although the FDA has recently issued a boxed warning for increased risk of severe hypocalcemia in individuals with advanced chronic kidney disease. Self-management abilities of the person with diabetes should be considered in medication selection, recommending strict medication-taking behavior, as there can be rebound bone loss causing multiple vertebral fractures with missed doses of denosumab or delays in care.

Glucose-lowering medications with a good bone safety profile are preferred. This is especially true in older adults, in people with longer duration of disease, or in people with complications. Aggressive therapeutic approaches should be avoided in those who are frail and in older adults to prevent hypoglycemic events and falls.

# Glucose-Lowering Medications and Bone Health

Care plans for type 2 diabetes treatment should consider individual fracture risk and the potential effect of medications on bone health. Diabetes is associated with increased risk of cancers of the liver, pancreas, endometrium, colon and rectum, breast,

Downloaded from diabetesjournals.org by guest on 16 December 2024

---

# Comprehensive Medical Evaluation and Assessment of Comorbidities

and bladder (96). The association may result from shared risk factors between type 2 diabetes and cancer (older age, obesity, and physical inactivity) but may also be due to diabetes-related factors (97), such as underlying disease physiology or diabetes treatments, although evidence for these links is scarce. People with diabetes should be encouraged to undergo recommended age-and sex-appropriate cancer screenings, coordinated with their primary health care professional, and to reduce their modifiable cancer risk factors (obesity, physical inactivity, and smoking). New onset of atypical diabetes (lean body habitus and negative family history) in a middle-aged or older person may precede the diagnosis of pancreatic adenocarcinoma (98). Additionally, in a nationwide cancer registry in New Zealand, postpancreatitis diabetes mellitus was associated with significantly higher risk (2.4-fold) of pancreatic cancer compared with pancreatitis after type 2 diabetes (99). However, in the absence of other symptoms (e.g., weight loss and abdominal pain), routine screening for pancreatic cancer is not currently recommended. Metformin and sulfonylureas may have anticancer properties. Data for pioglitazone are mixed, with a previous concern for bladder cancer association. Recommendations cannot be made at this time (100–102). Thus far, the use of GLP-1 RAs has not been shown to be associated with the incidence of thyroid cancer, pancreatic cancer, or any other type of cancer in humans (103).

# Glycemic Status and Cognition

In individuals with diabetes, higher A1C level is associated with lower cognitive function (107). A meta-analysis of randomized trials found that intensive glycemic management, compared with higher A1C goals, was associated with a slightly lower rate of cognitive decline (108). However, these findings were driven by an older study with an A1C goal of <7.0% in the intensive treatment arm. Analyses within the ACCORD, Action in Diabetes and Vascular Disease: Preterax and Diamicron MR Controlled Evaluation (ADVANCE), and Veterans Affairs Diabetes Trial (VADT) studies found that intensive glycemic management (A1C goal of <6.0–6.5%) resulted in no differences in cognitive outcomes compared with standard control (108–110). Therefore, intensive glycemic management should not be advised for the improvement of cognitive function in individuals with type 2 diabetes.

# Dental Care

# Recommendations

4.15 People with diabetes should be referred for a dental exam at least once per year. E

4.16 Coordinate efforts between the medical and dental teams to appropriately adjust glucose-lowering medication and treatment plans prior to and in the post–dental procedure period as needed. B

Periodontal disease is more severe, and may be more prevalent, in people with diabetes than in those without and has been associated with higher A1C levels (120–122). Longitudinal studies suggest that people with periodontal disease have higher rates of incident diabetes. Current evidence suggests that periodontal disease adversely affects diabetes outcomes, and periodontal treatment using subgingival instrumentation may improve glycemic outcomes (123,124). In a randomized controlled trial (RCT), intensive periodontal treatment was associated with better glycemic outcomes (A1C 8.3% vs. 7.8% in control subjects and the intensive-treatment group, respectively).

---

# Comprehensive Medical Evaluation and Assessment of Comorbidities

# Diabetes Care Volume 48, Supplement 1, January 2025

Reduction in inflammatory markers after 12 months of follow-up (125).

A disability is defined as a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more major life activities of an individual (131,132). Activities of daily living (ADLs) and instrumental activities of daily living (IADLs) comprise basic and complex life care tasks, respectively. The capacity to accomplish such tasks serves as an important measure of function. Diabetes is associated with an increase in the risk of work and physical disability, with estimates of 50–80% increased risk of disability for people with diabetes compared with people without diabetes (133). Reviews have shown that lower-body functional limitation was the most prevalent disability (47–84%) among people with diabetes (134,135).

In a systematic review and meta-analysis, the presence of diabetes increased the risk of mobility disability (15 studies; odds ratio [OR] 1.71 [95% CI 1.53–1.91]; RR 1.51 [95% CI 1.38–1.64]), of IADL disability (10 studies; OR 1.65 [95% CI 1.55–1.74]), and of ADL disability (16 studies; OR 1.82 [95% CI 1.63–2.04]; RR 1.82 [95% CI 1.40–2.36]) (133). The mechanisms underlying disability are multifactorial and include obesity, coronary artery disease, stroke, lower extremity complications, and physiological factors such as hyperglycemia, sarcopenia, and insulin resistance (136).

Diabetic peripheral neuropathy (DPN) is a common complication of both type 1 and 2 diabetes and may cause impaired postural balance and gait kinematics (137), leading to functional disability. DPN can be found in up to half of people with type 1 or type 2 diabetes, resulting in physical disability and neuropathic pain, resulting in a diminished quality of life (138). Glycemic management prevents DPN development in type 1 diabetes; in contrast, glycemic management has modest or no benefit in individuals with type 2 diabetes, possibly due to the combined effect of coexisting comorbidities (138).

People with lower-extremity involvement due to DPN have 3 times more risk of restricted mobility, resulting in people with DPN experiencing more physical dysfunctions and impairments than people who have diabetes but not neuropathy (139). Furthermore, DPN may progress to nontraumatic lower-limb amputation, which significantly impacts quality of life (140).

# Disability Recommendation

4.17 Assess for disability at the initial visit and for decline in function at each subsequent visit in people with diabetes. If a disability is impacting functional ability or capacity to manage their diabetes, a referral should be made to an appropriate health care professional specializing in disability (e.g., physical medicine and rehabilitation specialist, physical therapist, occupational therapist, or speech-language pathologist).

To assess the impact of diabetes on an individual’s daily functioning, clinicians should consider evaluating their ability to perform ADLs and IADLs, ensuring they can manage basic self-care and more complex tasks necessary for specific living situations, services, and supports. A psychosocial assessment should be conducted to screen for behavioral health conditions like depression and anxiety and to understand the individual’s social support and coping mechanisms.

Functional capacity evaluations, involving tests for physical endurance and strength, are used to gauge the ability of the person with diabetes to work and carry out daily activities. Additionally, standardized disability questionnaires and scales, such as the Diabetes Distress Scale (DDS) and the World Health Organization Disability Assessment Schedule (WHODAS 2.0), are employed to measure the emotional burden of diabetes and overall disability (146,147). These suggested structured assessments are particularly relevant if individuals have fallen, had emergency department visits, missed appointments, made significant errors in the treatment plan, or exhibit apathy and depressed mood.

Downloaded from diabetesjournals.org by guest on 16 December 2024

---

# Comprehensive Medical Evaluation and Assessment of Comorbidities

Moreover, when treating people with an acquired disability from diabetes, it is vital to consider social determinants of health, race and ethnicity, and socioeconomic status (148). Rates of diabetes-related major amputations are higher in individuals who are from racial and ethnic minoritized groups (149), live in rural areas, and are from regions with the lowest socioeconomic levels (150). Addressing the complex challenges faced by individuals with acquired disabilities from diabetes requires a multifaceted approach involving solutions from both within and outside the health care system. By focusing on social determinants of health, health care professionals can develop appropriate interventions, provide advocacy, and establish support systems that cater to the specific needs of this population. See Section 1, “Improving Care and Promoting Health in Populations.”

# Hepatitis C

Infection with hepatitis C virus (HCV) is associated with a higher prevalence of type 2 diabetes, which is present in up to one-third of individuals with chronic HCV infection. HCV may impair glucose metabolism by several mechanisms, including directly via viral proteins and indirectly by altering proinflammatory cytokine levels (151). The use of newer direct-acting antiviral drugs produces a sustained virological response (cure) in nearly all cases and has been reported to improve glucose metabolism in individuals with diabetes (152). A meta-analysis of mostly observational studies found a mean reduction in A1C levels of 0.45% (95% CI –0.60 to –0.30) and reduced requirement for glucose-lowering medication use following successful eradication of HCV infection (153).

# Erectile Dysfunction

# Recommendation

4.19 In men with diabetes or prediabetes, screen for ED, particularly in those with high cardiovascular risk, retinopathy, cardiovascular disease, chronic kidney disease, peripheral or autonomic neuropathy, longer duration of diabetes, depression, and hypogonadism, and in those who are not meeting glycemic goals. B

In a recent meta-analysis, testosterone was superior to placebo in improving erectile function in men with testosterone deficiency; however, the magnitude of the effect was lower in the presence of diabetes and obesity (169).

# Low Testosterone in Men

# Recommendation

4.18 In men with diabetes or prediabetes, inquire about sexual health (e.g., low libido and erectile dysfunction [ED]). If symptoms and/or signs of hypogonadism are detected (e.g., low libido, ED, and depression), screen with a morning serum total testosterone level. B

The most common sexual dysfunction in men is ED, with an estimated prevalence of 52.5% in men with diabetes (160). The best predictors of ED are age (>40 years), CVD, diabetes, hypertension, obesity, dyslipidemia, metabolic syndrome, hypogonadism, smoking, depression, and use of medications such as antidepressants and opioids (161,162). Because diabetes, poor nutrition, obesity, lack of exercise, and CVD are often interrelated, it may be challenging to identify the primary risk factor (154,155). Testosterone replacement in men with symptomatic hypogonadism may have benefits, including improved sexual function, well-being, muscle mass and strength, and bone density (156).

# Mean levels of testosterone

Mean levels of testosterone are lower in men with diabetes than in age-matched men without diabetes, but obesity is a major confounder (154,155). Testosterone replacement in older men with hypogonadism has been associated with increased coronary artery plaque volume, with no conclusive evidence that testosterone supplementation is associated with increased cardiovascular risk in all men with hypogonadism (157). Furthermore, erectile dysfunction (ED) is also common in people with diabetes (158), and it is reasonable to measure and correct testosterone levels close to the lower limit to address the desire component that contributes to erectile difficulties (159) (see ERECTILE DYSFUNCTION, below, for more information on evaluation and further discussion).

# Physical Activity

Physical activity may be protective. Men with diabetes and ED report a significant decline in quality-of-life measures and an increase in depressive symptoms (166), and depression is a well-recognized risk factor for ED. Given the bidirectional relationship between ED and depression, treatment of either one can result in improvement in the other condition. CKD is also a risk factor for CVD and ED, with prevalence rates of ED >75% in men on hemodialysis (167).

Awareness and identification of these characteristics, factors, and behaviors can guide clinicians in early screening, treatment, prevention, and counseling in all men with diabetes and particularly those at higher risk for ED (165). Given the evidence that ED is strongly associated with diabetes and CVD, men with ED should be evaluated and managed for cardiovascular and endocrine risk factors. Glycemic assessment in men not previously diagnosed with diabetes, lipid profile, and morning total testosterone should be considered mandatory in all men newly presenting with ED (168).

Meta-analyses show that all phosphodiesterase type 5 inhibitors (PDE5Is) are superior to placebo in treating ED, lower dosages had effects comparable with those of higher dosages, and various PDE5Is show comparable efficacy (159). PDE5Is are associated with an increased risk of headaches, flushing, and dyspepsia (159). First-line therapy for ED in men with diabetes is PDE5Is, but men with diabetes may be less responsive than men without diabetes (160). Strategies to improve response to PDE5Is include daily therapy.

---

# Comprehensive Medical Evaluation and Assessment of Comorbidities

# Diabetes Care

# Volume 48, Supplement 1, January 2025

Optimization of comorbidities. In men with diabetes not responding to PDEIs, other potentially effective treatments may include intracavernosal injections, intraurethral prostaglandin, vacuum erection devices, and penile prosthetic surgery (160).

# Female Sexual Dysfunction

# Recommendations

4.20 In women with diabetes or prediabetes, inquire about sexual health by screening for desire (libido), arousal, and orgasm difficulties, particularly in those who experience depression and/or anxiety and those with recurrent urinary tract infections. B

4.21 In postmenopausal women with diabetes or prediabetes, screen for symptoms and/or signs of genitourinary syndrome of menopause, including vaginal dryness and dyspareunia. B

Female sexual dysfunction (FSD) is common in women with diabetes. In an epidemiologic cross-sectional study of community-residing middle-aged and older adults (57–85 years), women with diagnosed diabetes were less likely than men with diagnosed diabetes (adjusted OR 0.28 [95% CI 0.16–0.49]) and women without diabetes (0.63 [0.45–0.87]) to be sexually active (170). Older women with diabetes are as likely as men to have sexual problems but are significantly less likely to have discussed sex with a physician (170).

While studies showing the association between diabetes and FSD are less conclusive than those in men, most have reported a higher prevalence of FSD in women with diabetes compared with women without diabetes (171). A meta-analysis found that sexual dysfunctions are more common in women with type 1 and type 2 diabetes (OR 2.27 and 2.49, respectively) than in women without diabetes (172).

Reviews report a wide range of prevalence rates of sexual dysfunctions in women with diabetes. In women with type 1 diabetes, 16–85% (vs. 0–66% in women without diabetes) report problems with desire, 11–76% (vs. 0–41%) report problems with arousal, and 9–66% (vs. 0–39%) report problems with orgasm; 9–57% (vs. 0–28%) report problems with lubrication, and 7–61% (vs. 5–39%) report problems with pain. In women with type 2 diabetes, 70–82% (vs. 10–66% in women without diabetes) report problems with desire, 54–68% (vs. 3–41%) report resulting in lack of initiation, and physical challenges such as pain, vaginal dryness, and impaired sensitivity.

Several women explained that vaginal dryness was an obstacle during sexual intercourse, leading to pain or even refraining from sexual activity. Sexual challenges were perceived to become a source of disappointment to the partners and consequential guilt for the women. Women also reported fear of hypoglycemia during sex, and some reported trying to maintain mild hyperglycemia. Technology devices, such as glucose monitors and insulin pumps, could be perceived as both a physical and mental obstacle during sexual activity (176).

Women with type 2 (25%) or type 1 (17%) diabetes would like their health care professional to initiate a discussion on how diabetes is affecting their sex life (177). Women with type 1 diabetes almost unanimously endorsed that sexual health should be addressed, that they would find it a relief that they were not alone, that they should be provided with information when they are young, and that it would be difficult to address the topic themselves (176). Unfortunately, many health care professionals do not actively discuss sexual functioning in consultations, meaning that when the topic is discussed it is mostly the person with diabetes who initiates the conversation (170). This leads to a marked underdiagnosis and undertreatment of sexual dysfunctions in people with diabetes.

While no specific guidelines are available for the treatment of FSD in this population, women with type 1 or type 2 diabetes should be encouraged to engage in lifestyle interventions and, in the absence of contraindications, may benefit from already-approved treatments for FSD (178). The Look AHEAD (Action for Health in Diabetes) study on intervention demonstrated statistical improvements in the FSFI total score and all domains of sexual dysfunction (179). Lifestyle factors that enhance desire and sexual function include nutrition (such as the Mediterranean eating pattern), exercise (such as walking), and smoking cessation. Other interventions include improving glycemic management and prevention of diabetes complications; diagnosis and treatment of menopausal symptoms with hormonal therapies; addressing vaginal dryness and dyspareunia as well as urinary tract and mycotic genital infections; screening and addressing depression, anxiety, diabetes distress, and.

---

# Comprehensive Medical Evaluation and Assessment of Comorbidities

related psychosocial issues; and considering over a 2-year period preceding evaluation) or other secondary causes of hepatic steatosis (181). It is estimated that in adults in the U.S., the prevalence of MASLD is >70% of people with type 2 diabetes (182–184). This is consistent with studies from other countries (185,186). The prevalence of liver steatosis in a population with type 1 diabetes by MRI (i.e., the gold standard) with low prevalence of obesity was only 8.8% compared with 68% in people with type 2 diabetes (196). The prevalence of clinically significant fibrosis ($F2) is estimated to be 5% (197), which is much lower than the prevalence in type 2 diabetes (182,183,189). Therefore, screening for fibrosis in people with type 1 diabetes should only be considered in the presence of additional risk factors for MASLD, such as obesity, incidental hepatic steatosis on imaging, or elevated plasma aminotransferases.

# Screening Recommendations

1. Screen adults with type 2 diabetes or with prediabetes, particularly those with obesity or other cardiometabolic risk factors or established cardiovascular disease, for their risk of having or developing cirrhosis related to metabolic dysfunction–associated steatohepatitis (MASH) using a calculated fibrosis-4 index (FIB-4) (derived from age, ALT, AST, and platelets [mdcalc.com/calc/2200/fibrosis4-fib-4-index-liver-fibrosis]), even if they have normal liver enzymes. B
2. Adults with diabetes or prediabetes with persistently elevated plasma aminotransferase levels for >6 months and low FIB-4 should be evaluated for other causes of liver disease. B
3. Adults with type 2 diabetes or prediabetes with a FIB-4 ≥1.3 should have additional risk stratification by liver stiffness measurement with transient elastography, or, if unavailable, the enhanced liver fibrosis (ELF) test. B
4. Refer adults with type 2 diabetes or prediabetes at higher risk for significant liver fibrosis (i.e., as indicated by FIB-4, liver stiffness measurement, or ELF) to a gastroenterologist or hepatologist for further evaluation and management. B

Diabetes is a major risk factor for developing MASH (formerly nonalcoholic steatohepatitis, or NASH) and worse liver outcomes (185,186). MASH is defined histologically as having ≥5% hepatic steatosis with inflammation and hepatocyte injury (hepatocyte ballooning), with or without evidence of liver fibrosis (181). Steatohepatitis is estimated to affect more than half of people with type 2 diabetes with MASLD (189,190). Fibrosis stages are classified histologically as the following: F0, no fibrosis; F1, mild; F2, moderate (significant); F3, severe (advanced); and F4, cirrhosis. In the U.S., between 12% and 20% of people with type 2 diabetes have "at-risk" MASH (i.e., steatohepatitis with clinically significant fibrosis [$F2] and at risk for cirrhosis) (182,183,189). A similar or higher prevalence has been observed worldwide (185,186,190). People with type 2 diabetes and at-risk MASH are at an increased risk of future cirrhosis, hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) (191,192), and liver transplantation (193). The prevalence of MASLD in people with type 1 diabetes is also significant.

The fibrosis-4 index (FIB-4) is the most cost-effective strategy for the initial screening of people with prediabetes and cardiometabolic risk factors or with type 2 diabetes for at-risk MASH in the absence of ongoing or recent consumption of significant amounts of alcohol (defined as ingestion of >21 standard drinks per week in men and >14 standard drinks per week in women).

---

S74      Comprehensive Medical Evaluation and Assessment of Comorbidities                                           Diabetes Care Volume 48, Supplement 1, January 2025

primary care and diabetes clinical set-
tings (186,200,205,206,215–217). The
diagnostic algorithm for the screening
and liver fibrosis risk stratification of peo-
ple with prediabetes or type 2 diabetes is
shown in Fig. 4.2. A screening strategy
relying on elevated plasma aminotrans-
ferases >40 units/L would miss most in-
dividuals with MASH in these settings, as
at-risk MASH with clinically significant
fibrosis (≥F2) is frequently observed
with plasma aminotransferases below the
commonly used cutoff of 40 units/L
(182–184,189,218,219). The American Col-
lege of Gastroenterology considers the
upper limit of normal ALT levels to be
29–33 units/L for male individuals and
19–25 units/L for female individuals (220),
as higher levels are associated with in-
creased liver-related mortality. The FIB-4 es-
timates the risk of hepatic cirrhosis and is
calculated from the computation of age,
plasma aminotransferases (AST and ALT),
and platelet count (mdcalc.com/calc/2200/
fibrosis-4-fib-4-index-liver-fibrosis). A value
of <1.3 is considered low risk of having ad-
vanced fibrosis (F3–F4) and for developing
adverse liver outcomes, while ≥1.3 is con-
sidered as having a higher probability of

at-risk MASH clinically significant fibrosis
(≥F2) and increased risk of adverse liver
outcomes. A value of >2.67 confers a high
risk of having advanced fibrosis (F3–F4),
and referral to the liver specialist is war-
ranted without additional testing. FIB-4
predicts changes over time in hepatic fi-
brosis (221,222) and allows risk stratifi-
cation of individuals in terms of future
liver-related morbidity and mortality (223).
FIB-4 has reasonable specificity but low
sensitivity, hence a negative result rules
out fibrosis while a positive result requires
confirmatory testing (222,224,225). Its
low cost, simplicity, and good specificity
make it the initial test of choice (Fig. 4.2).
FIB-4 has not been validated in pediatric
populations or in adults aged <35 years.
In people with diabetes ≥65 years of age,
higher cutoffs for FIB-4 have been recom-
mended (1.9–2.0 rather than ≥1.3) (226).
    In people with a FIB-4 ≥1.3, there is
need for additional risk stratification with
a liver stiffness measurement (LSM) by
transient elastography (Fig. 4.2). Use of a
second nonproprietary diagnostic panel is
not recommended (e.g., MASLD fibrosis
score and others), as they generally do not
perform better than FIB-4 (181,184,224).

Transient elastography (LSM) is the best-
validated imaging technique for fibrosis
risk stratification, and it predicts future cir-
rhosis and all-cause mortality in MASLD
(205,206,227). An LSM value of <8.0 kPa
has a good negative predictive value
to exclude advanced fibrosis (≥F3–F4)
(228–230) and indicates lower risk for
clinically significant fibrosis. Such individ-
uals with prediabetes or type 2 diabetes
can be followed in nonspecialty clinics
with repeat surveillance testing every
≥2 years, although the precise time in-
terval remains to be established. If the
LSM is ≥8.0 kPa, the risk for advanced fi-
brosis (≥F3–F4) is higher and such individ-
uals should be referred to the hepatologist
(181,189,205,206) within the framework
of an interprofessional team (231–233).
FIB-4 followed by LSM helps stratify peo-
ple with diabetes by risk level and mini-
mize specialty referrals (227,234–237) (Fig.
4.2). Given the lack of widespread avail-
ability of LSM, the ELF test is a good alter-
native (238). Individuals with ELF <9.8 are
considered at low risk for adverse liver
outcomes. Individuals with ELF ≥9.8 are
considered at high risk of having MASH
with advanced liver fibrosis (≥F3–F4) and

Diagnostic Algorithm for the Prevention of Cirrhosis in People With
Metabolic Dysfunction-Associated Steatotic Liver Disease (MASLD)

| Lower risk of | Managed by primary care
future cirrhosis (and interprofessional team)
• Repeat FIB-4 every 1-2 years
• Optimize lifestyle and treatment
of comorbidities
Groups with the highest risk of
future cirrhosis No
No
Type 2 diabetes
Is FIB-4 Is LSM
Prediabetes ≥1.3? ≥8.0 kPa*?
Rule out
secondary
causes of
steatosis Yes
Obesity or ↑ ALT
with ≥1 CV factors Yes
Managed by liver specialist
(and interprofessional team)
Higher risk of
*Consider ELF if LSM not available. Refer to future cirrhosis • Additional imaging and biomarker
liver specialist if ELF ≥9.8 risk stratification
If FIB-4 • Treatment + long-term follow-up
>2.67

Figure 4.2—Diagnostic algorithm for risk stratification and the prevention of cirrhosis in individuals with metabolic dysfunction–associated steatotic
liver disease (MASLD). CV, cardiovascular; ELF, enhanced liver fibrosis test; FIB-4, fibrosis-4 index; LSM, liver stiffness measurement, as measured
by vibration-controlled transient elastography. *In the absence of LSM, consider ELF a diagnostic alternative. If ELF ≥9.8, an individual is at high
risk of metabolic dysfunction–associated steatohepatitis with advanced liver fibrosis (≥F3–F4) and should be referred to a liver specialist.

---

# Comprehensive Medical Evaluation and Assessment of Comorbidities

therefore are at risk for adverse liver outcomes (181,217). They should be referred to a gastroenterologist or hepatologist. The optimal cutoff for clinical use of ELF in primary care and endocrinology settings is evolving (239–242). An ELF <9.8 suggests an individual is at low risk of advanced liver fibrosis and may be followed in the nonspecialty clinic with repeat testing in $2 years but may need repeat testing more often if ELF is between 9.2 and 9.7.

Specialists may order additional tests for fibrosis risk stratification in MASH (180,205,206,217), including magnetic resonance elastography (MRE) (best overall performance, particularly for early fibrosis stages) or multiparametric iron-corrected T1 MRI (cT1) (243) and patented blood-based fibrosis biomarkers. While liver biopsy remains the gold standard for the diagnosis of MASH, its indication is reserved to the discretion of the specialist within an interprofessional team approach due to high costs and potential for morbidity associated with this procedure.

# Management

# Recommendations

4.25 Adults with type 2 diabetes or prediabetes, particularly with overweight or obesity, who have metabolic dysfunction–associated steatotic liver disease (MASLD) should be recommended lifestyle changes using an interprofessional approach that promotes weight loss, ideally within a structured nutrition plan and physical activity program for cardiometabolic benefits B and histological improvement. C

4.26 In adults with type 2 diabetes, MASLD, and overweight or obesity, consider using a glucagon-like peptide 1 (GLP-1) receptor agonist (RA) or a dual glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide (GIP) and GLP-1 RA for the treatment of obesity with potential benefits in MASH as an adjunctive therapy to lifestyle interventions for weight loss. B

4.27a In adults with type 2 diabetes and biopsy-proven MASH or those at high risk for liver fibrosis (based on noninvasive tests), pioglitazone, a GLP-1 RA, or a dual GIP and GLP-1 RA is preferred for glycemic management.

4.27b Combination therapy with pioglitazone plus GLP-1 RA can be considered for the treatment of hyperglycemia in adults with type 2 diabetes with biopsy-proven MASH or those at high risk of liver fibrosis (identified with noninvasive tests) because of potential beneficial effects on MASH. B

4.28 For consideration of treatment with a thyroid hormone receptor-β agonist in adults with type 2 diabetes or prediabetes with MASLD with moderate (F2) or advanced (F3) liver fibrosis on liver histology, or by a validated imaging-based or blood-based test, refer to a gastroenterologist or hepatologist with expertise in MASLD management. A

4.29 Treatment initiation and monitoring should be individualized and within the context of an interprofessional team that includes a gastroenterologist or hepatologist, consideration of individual preferences, and a careful shared-decision cost-benefit discussion. B

4.30a In adults with type 2 diabetes and MASLD, use of glucose-lowering therapies other than pioglitazone or GLP-1 RAs may be continued as clinically indicated, but these therapies lack evidence of benefit in MASH. B

4.30b Insulin therapy is the preferred agent for the treatment of hyperglycemia in adults with type 2 diabetes with decompensated cirrhosis. C

4.31a Adults with type 2 diabetes and MASLD are at increased cardiovascular risk; therefore, comprehensive management of cardiovascular risk factors is recommended. B

4.31b Statin therapy is safe in adults with type 2 diabetes and compensated cirrhosis from MASLD and should be initiated or continued for cardiovascular risk reduction as clinically indicated. B

4.32a Consider metabolic surgery in appropriate candidates as an option to treat MASH in adults with type 2 diabetes if not achieved by lifestyle modification alone (see Section 8, “Obesity and Weight Management for the Prevention and Treatment of Type 2 Diabetes”).

---

# Metabolic Dysfunction–Associated Steatotic Liver Disease (MASLD) Treatment Algorithm

MASLD Treatment Algorithm

| MASLD Stage | Obesity pharmacotherapy | Diabetes pharmacotherapy | MASH pharmacotherapy |
|-------------|--------------------------|--------------------------|----------------------|
| MASLD with F0-F1 | Prefer GLP-1 RA, dual GIP and GLP-1 RA | Prefer GLP-1 RA, dual GIP and GLP-1 RA, pioglitazone, SGLT2i | Not indicated |
| MASLD with F2-F3 ("at risk" MASH) | Prefer GLP-1 RA, dual GIP and GLP-1 RA | Prefer GLP-1 RA, dual GIP and GLP-1 RA, pioglitazone | Resmetirom |
| Compensated cirrhosis | As with F2-F3 with caution* | As with F2-F3 with caution* | AVOID |
| Decompensated cirrhosis | AVOID | Only use insulin | AVOID |

*Individualized care and close monitoring needed in compensated cirrhosis given limited safety data available.

Individualize care, targeting the following:
- Adoption of a healthy lifestyle
- Weight loss (if indicated)
- Optimal diabetes management
- Cardiovascular risk reduction
- Need for metabolic surgery (as recommended by guidelines)

Figure 4.3—Metabolic dysfunction–associated steatotic liver disease (MASLD) treatment algorithm. F0-F1, no to minimal fibrosis; F2-F3, moderate fibrosis; F4, cirrhosis; GIP, glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide; GLP-1 RA, glucagon-like peptide 1 receptor agonist; MASH, metabolic dysfunction–associated steatohepatitis; SGLT2i, sodium–glucose cotransporter 2 inhibitor.

Given the high prevalence of at-risk MASH (~12–20%) (182–184,186,189), higher risk of disease progression and liver-related mortality (185,204,253), and the lack of pharmacological treatments once cirrhosis is established (254,255), optimizing the pharmacological management of hyperglycemia and obesity in people with type 2 diabetes and MASH could serve the dual purpose of addressing these comorbidities while treating the liver disease (Fig. 4.3). Therefore, early diagnosis and treatment of MASLD offers the best opportunity for cirrhosis prevention. In phase 2 clinical trials, pioglitazone and some GLP-1 RAs have been shown to be potentially effective to treat steatohepatitis (205,256–259) and to slow fibrosis progression (260–262). They may also decrease CVD (257), which is the number one cause of death in people with type 2 diabetes and MASLD (210). Evidence from phase 3 clinical trials still are not fully published (e.g., a phase 3 study on semaglutide, The Effect of Semaglutide in Subjects With Non-cirrhotic Non-alcoholic Steatohepatitis [ESSENSE] trial, is predicted to be published in 2025) (263), and no glucose-lowering or weight management medication is FDA approved for the treatment of MASH. The recommendation to treat hyperglycemia with GLP-1 RAs and/or pioglitazone in people with type 2 diabetes and MASLD is based on consistent histological benefit for steatohepatitis in several phase 2 RCTs with GLP-1 RAs and with pioglitazone (264–268) compared with no benefit with metformin or other glucose-lowering medications in MASH (181,205,206).

Pioglitazone improves glucose and lipid metabolism and reverses steatohepatitis in people with prediabetes or type 2 diabetes (261,264,265) and even in individuals without diabetes (266–268) (Fig. 4.3). Fibrosis also improved in some trials (265,267). A meta-analysis (260) concluded that pioglitazone treatment results in resolution of MASH and may improve fibrosis. Furthermore, combination therapy with pioglitazone plus a GLP-1 RA has been reported safe and effective for the treatment of hyperglycemia in adults with type 2 diabetes (269–272) as well as in reducing hepatic steatosis (269,271), suggesting additive benefit in individuals with MASLD. It is important to note that these studies are based on phase 2 clinical trials and await further phase 3 evidence. However, these plans are attractive because they offer potential benefit compared with lack of histological benefit (or clinical trial data) from other oral glucose-lowering therapies in MASLD. In the context of treating hyperglycemia in people with type 2 diabetes with MASLD, where the low cost of pioglitazone and any liver improvement would be an added benefit to glycemic management, these plans would be potentially cost-effective for the treatment of MASLD (273,274). Vitamin E may be beneficial for the treatment of MASH in people without diabetes (266). However, in people with type 2 diabetes, vitamin E monotherapy was found to be ineffective in a small RCT (261), and it did not seem to enhance pioglitazone's efficacy when used in combination, as reported in an earlier trial in this population (265). Pioglitazone causes dose-dependent weight gain (15 mg/day, mean weight gain of 1–2%; 45 mg/day, mean weight gain of 3–5%), which can be blunted or reversed if combined with SGLT2 inhibitors or GLP-1 RAs (257,271,272,275). Pioglitazone increases fracture risk, may promote heart failure if used in individuals with preexisting congestive heart failure, and may increase the risk of bladder cancer, although this remains controversial (181,205,206,257,258).

GLP-1 RAs are effective at inducing weight loss and ameliorating elevated

---

# Comprehensive Medical Evaluation and Assessment of Comorbidities

plasma aminotransferases and steatosis diabetes and MASLD for glycemic management, as clinically indicated. However, these agents have either failed to improve steatohepatitis in paired-biopsy studies (metformin) or have no RCTs with liver histological end points (i.e., sulfonylureas, glitinides, dipeptidyl peptidase 4 inhibitors, or acarbose). Insulin is the preferred glucose-lowering agent for the treatment of hyperglycemia in adults with type 2 diabetes with decompensated cirrhosis given the lack of robust evidence about the safety and efficacy of oral agents and noninsulin injectables (i.e., GLP-1 RAs and dual GIP and GLP-1 RAs) (255), although a recent 48-week study suggested that GLP-1 RAs are safe in individuals with MASH and compensated cirrhosis (287).

Resmetirom is a thyroid hormone receptor-β agonist approved by the FDA for the treatment of adults with MASLD with moderate (F2) or advanced (F3) liver fibrosis on liver histology or a validated imaging- or blood-based test. In a phase 3 RCT, resmetirom for 52 weeks in 966 adults at the highest dose of 100 mg (or placebo) met the primary end point of MASH resolution without worsening of fibrosis in 29.9% of participants compared with 9.7% on placebo (P < 0.001) (262). Cumulatively, semaglutide did not significantly affect the stage of liver fibrosis in this group of people but, over 72 weeks, slowed the progression of liver fibrosis (4.9% with the GLP-1 RA at the highest dose compared with 18.8% on placebo).

Tirzepatide is a dual GIP and GLP-1 RA known to reduce liver steatosis in MASLD (277), and a phase 2 paired-biopsy study of 190 adults with overweight or obesity with MASH (50–60% of whom had type 2 diabetes) recently reported that doses of 5, 10, and 15 mg/day resulted in resolution of steatohepatitis without worsening of fibrosis in 44%, 56%, and 62% of participants, respectively, compared with 10% of participants receiving placebo (P < 0.001 for all three comparisons) (278). Improvement of at least one fibrosis stage without worsening of MASH occurred in 55%, 51%, and 61% of participants, respectively, compared with 30% of participants receiving placebo.

Survodutide is a dual GLP-1 and glucagon RA that is in development, and a phase 2 paired-biopsy trial recently reported benefit in MASH (279). In summary, GLP-1–based therapies and/or pioglitazone is recommended to treat type 2 diabetes in adults with MASH based on histological benefit for steatohepatitis in several phase 2 RCTs (278,279) compared with no benefit with metformin or other glucose-lowering or weight loss medications. Within the context of their approved indication (e.g., obesity or type 2 diabetes), these medications are cost-effective to treat the comorbidity, while potentially improving MASH, which becomes an added benefit.

SGLT2 inhibitors (280–282) and insulin (258) reduce hepatic steatosis, but their effects on steatohepatitis remain unknown. The use of glucose-lowering agents other than pioglitazone or GLP-1 RAs may be continued in individuals with type 2 diabetes and MASH. Given that many individuals with MASH have metabolic risks (type 2 diabetes and obesity) that are indications for metabolic surgery, the improvement in liver health is expected, but surgical indication should follow current practice guidelines.

Metabolic surgery leading to sustained weight loss and improvement of type 2 diabetes can improve MASH and cardiometabolic health, altering the natural history of the disease (288). Meta-analyses report that 70–80% of people have improvement in hepatic steatosis, 50–75% of people have improvement in inflammation and hepatocyte ballooning (necrosis), and 30–40% of people have improvement in fibrosis (289,290). It may also reduce the risk of HCC (290). It is important to note that currently metabolic surgery is not indicated solely for treatment of MASH.

Guidance by the American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases (AASLD) about optimal individual identification for treatment, safety, and long-term monitoring has recently been published (286). This is especially relevant because hypothyroidism and hypogonadism are more prevalent in people with MASLD than in the general population (181,205), and clinicians should monitor all individuals with MASLD for symptoms of endocrine deficiency and manage according to clinical practice guidelines. Per its label, candidates for resmetirom treatment are those with MASLD and moderate (F2) to advanced (F3) liver fibrosis but not with cirrhosis or other active liver disease (i.e., alcohol-related liver disease, autoimmune hepatitis, or primary biliary cholangitis) or unmanaged hypothyroidism or hyperthyroidism.

Adults with type 2 diabetes and MASLD are at an increased risk of CVD and require comprehensive management of cardiovascular risk factors (181,205,206). Within an interprofessional approach, statin therapy should be initiated or continued for cardiovascular risk reduction as clinically indicated. Overall, its use appears to be safe in adults with type 2 diabetes and MASH, including in the presence of compensated cirrhosis (Child-Pugh class A or B cirrhosis) from MASLD.

---

# Comprehensive Medical Evaluation and Assessment of Comorbidities

# Diabetes Care

# Volume 48, Supplement 1, January 2025

Even suggest that statin use in people with chronic liver disease may reduce episodes of hepatic decompensation and/or overall mortality (291,292). Statin therapy is not recommended in decompensated cirrhosis given limited safety and efficacy data (181,205,206).

# Obstructive Sleep Apnea

Age-adjusted rates of obstructive sleep apnea, a risk factor for CVD, are significantly higher (4- to 10-fold) with obesity, especially with central obesity (293) (see Section 5, “Facilitating Positive Health Behaviors and Well-being to Improve Health Outcomes”). The prevalence of obstructive sleep apnea in the population with type 2 diabetes may be as high as 23%, and the prevalence of any sleep-disordered breathing may be as high as 58% (294,295). In participants with obesity enrolled in the Look AHEAD trial, the prevalence exceeded 80% (296). Obstructive sleep apnea should be evaluated in individuals with suggestive symptoms (e.g., excessive daytime sleepiness, snoring, and witnessed apnea) (297). Sleep apnea treatment (lifestyle modification, continuous positive airway pressure, oral appliances, and surgery) significantly improves quality of life and blood pressure management. Recently, two phase 3 randomized trials found that among adults with obesity and moderate-to-severe obstructive sleep apnea but without diabetes, treatment with the dual GIP and GLP-1 RA tirzepatide substantially reduced sleep apnea severity (298). More research is needed to determine the effects of GLP-1 and dual GIP and GLP-1 RAs on sleep apnea in people with diabetes.

# Pancreatitis

Diabetes is linked to diseases of the exocrine pancreas, such as pancreatitis, which may disrupt the global architecture or physiology of the pancreas, often resulting in both exocrine and endocrine dysfunction. Up to half of individuals with diabetes may have some degree of impaired exocrine pancreas function (299). People with diabetes are at an approximately twofold higher risk of developing acute pancreatitis (300). Conversely, prediabetes and/or diabetes has been found to develop in approximately one-third of individuals after an episode of acute pancreatitis (301); thus, the relationship is likely bidirectional.

# Sensory Impairment

Hearing impairment, both in high-frequency and low- to midfrequency ranges, is more common in people with diabetes than in those without, with stronger associations found in studies of younger people (312). Proposed pathophysiologic mechanisms include the combined contributions of hyperglycemia and oxidative stress with cochlear microangiopathy and auditory neuropathy (313). In a National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) analysis, hearing impairment was about twice as prevalent in people with diabetes as in those without, after adjusting for age and other risk factors for hearing impairment (314). Low HDL cholesterol, coronary heart disease, peripheral neuropathy, and general poor health have been reported as risk factors for hearing impairment for people with diabetes, but an association of hearing loss with glycemia has not been consistently observed (315). In the DCCT/EDIC cohort, increases in the time-weighted mean A1C were associated with increased risk of hearing impairment when tested after long-term (>20 years) follow-up, with every 10% increase in A1C leading to 19% increased risk.

# References

1. Northwood M, Shah AQ, Abeygunawardena C, Garnett A, Schumacher C. Care coordination of older adults with diabetes: a scoping review. Can J Diabetes 2023;47:272–286
2. Stellefson M, Dipnarine K, Stopka C. The chronic care model and diabetes management in US primary care settings: a systematic review. Prev Chronic Dis 2013;10:E26
3. Coleman K, Austin BT, Brach C, Wagner EH. Evidence on the Chronic Care Model in the new millennium. Health Aff (Millwood) 2009;28:75–85
4. Gabbay RA, Bailit MH, Mauger DT, Wagner EH, Siminerio L. Multipayer patient-centered medical home implementation guided by the chronic care model. Jt Comm J Qual Patient Saf 2011;37:265–273
5. Adler AI, Coleman RL, Leal J, Whiteley WN, Clarke P, Holman RR. Post-trial monitoring of a randomised controlled trial of intensive glycaemic control in type 2 diabetes extended from 10 years to 24 years (UKPDS 91). Lancet 2024;404:145–155
6. Nathan DM, Genuth S, Lachin J, et al.; Diabetes Control and Complications Trial Research Group. The effect of intensive treatment of diabetes on the development and progression of long-term complications in insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus. N Engl J Med 1993;329:977–986
7. Lachin JM, Genuth S, Nathan DM, Zinman B, Rutledge BN; DCCT/EDIC Research Group. Effect of glycemic exposure on the risk of microvascular complications in the diabetes control and complications trial–revisited. Diabetes 2008;57:995–1001
8. White NH, Cleary PA, Dahms W, Goldstein D, Malone J, Tamborlane WV. Diabetes Control and Complications Trial (DCCT)/Epidemiology of Diabetes Interventions and Complications (EDIC) Research Group. Beneficial effects of intensive therapy of diabetes during adolescence: outcomes after the conclusion of the Diabetes Control and Complications Trial (DCCT). J Pediatr 2001;139:804–812
9. Rodriguez K, Ryan D, Dickinson JK, Phan V. Improving quality outcomes: the value of diabetes care and education specialists. Clin Diabetes 2022;40:356–365
10. Nathan DM, Bayless M, Cleary P, et al.; DCCT/EDIC Research Group. Diabetes control and complications trial/epidemiology of diabetes interventions and complications study at 30 years: advances and contributions. Diabetes 2013;62:3976–3986
11. Anderson RM, Funnell MM. Compliance and adherence are dysfunctional concepts in diabetes care. Diabetes Educ 2000;26:597–604
12. Sarkar U, Fisher L, Schillinger D. Is self-efficacy associated with diabetes self-management across race/ethnicity and health literacy? Diabetes Care 2006;29:823–829
13. King DK, Glasgow RE, Toobert DJ, et al. Self-efficacy, problem solving, and social-environmental support are associated with diabetes self-management behaviors. Diabetes Care 2010;33:751–753

---

# Comprehensive Medical Evaluation and Assessment of Comorbidities

# References

1. Nouwen A, Urquhart Law G, Hussain S, McGovern S, Napier H. Comparison of the role of self-efficacy and illness representations in relation to dietary self-care and diabetes distress in adolescents with type 1 diabetes. Psychol Health 2009;24:1071–1084
2. Dickinson JK, Guzman SJ, Maryniuk MD, et al. The use of language in diabetes care and education. Diabetes Care 2017;40:1790–1799
3. Wodi AP, Murthy N, McNally VV, Daley MF, Cineas S. Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices recommended immunization schedule for children and adolescents aged 18 years or younger - United States, 2024. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2024;73:6–10
4. Murthy N, Wodi AP, McNally VV, Daley MF, Cineas S. Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices recommended immunization schedule for adults aged 19 years or older - United States, 2024. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2024;73:11–15
5. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Advisory Committee on Immunization Practice (ACIP). ACIP Evidence to Recommendation User’s Guide. 2020. Accessed 8 October 2024. Available from https://stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/127248
6. Weng MK, Doshani M, Khan MA, et al. Universal hepatitis B vaccination in adults aged 19-59 years: updated recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices - United States, 2022. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2022;71:477–483
7. Goeijenbier M, van Sloten TT, Slobbe L, et al. Benefits of flu vaccination for persons with diabetes mellitus: a review. Vaccine 2017;35:5095–5101
8. Yedlapati SH, Khan SU, Talluri S, et al. Effects of influenza vaccine on mortality and cardiovascular outcomes in patients with cardiovascular disease: a systematic review and meta-analysis. J Am Heart Assoc 2021;10:e019636
9. Grohskopf LA, Ferdinands JM, Blanton LH, Broder KR, Loehr J. Prevention and control of seasonal influenza with vaccines: recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices-United States, 2024-25 influenza season. MMWR Recomm Rep 2024;73:1–25
10. Kornum JB, Thomsen RW, Riis A, Lervang H-H, Schønheyder HC, Sørensen HT. Diabetes, glycemic control, and risk of hospitalization with pneumonia: a population-based case-control study. Diabetes Care 2008;31:1541–1545
11. Kobayashi M, Pilishvili T, Farrar JL, et al. Pneumococcal vaccine for adults aged $19 years: recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices, United States, 2023. MMWR Recomm Rep 2023;72:1–39
12. Britton A, Roper LE, Kotton CN, et al. Use of respiratory syncytial virus vaccines in adults aged $60 years: updated recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices - United States, 2024. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2024;73:696–702
13. Grant RW, Ashburner JM, Hong CS, Chang Y, Barry MJ, Atlas SJ. Defining patient complexity from the primary care physician’s perspective: a cohort study. Ann Intern Med 2011;155:797–804
14. Tinetti ME, Fried TR, Boyd CM. Designing health care for the most common chronic condition–multimorbidity. JAMA 2012;307:2493–2494
15. Sudore RL, Karter AJ, Huang ES, et al. Symptom burden of adults with type 2 diabetes.
16. Nederstigt C, Uitbeijerse BS, Janssen LGM, Corssmit EPM, de Koning EJP, Dekkers OM. Associated auto-immune disease in type 1 diabetes patients: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Eur J Endocrinol 2019;180:135–144
17. De Block CE, D, Leeuw IH, V, Gaal LF. High prevalence of manifestations of gastric auto-immunity in parietal cell antibody-positive type 1 diabetic patients. The Belgian Diabetes Registry. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1999;84:4062–4067
18. Triolo TM, Armstrong TK, McFann K, et al. Additional autoimmune disease found in 33% of patients at type 1 diabetes onset. Diabetes Care 2011;34:1211–1213
19. Hughes JW, Riddlesworth TD, DiMeglio LA, Miller KM, Rickels MR, McGill JB; T1D Exchange Clinic Network. Autoimmune diseases in children and adults with type 1 diabetes from the T1D Exchange Clinic Registry. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2016;101:4931–4937
20. Kahaly GJ, Hansen MP. Type 1 diabetes associated autoimmunity. Autoimmun Rev 2016;15:644–648
21. Eisenbarth GS, Gottlieb PA. Autoimmune polyendocrine syndromes. N Engl J Med 2004;350:2068–2079
22. Rubio-Tapia A, Hill ID, Kelly CP, Calderwood AH, Murray JA. ACG clinical guidelines: diagnosis and management of celiac disease. Am J Gastroenterol 2013;108:656–676
23. Husby S, Murray JA, Katzka DA. AGA clinical practice update on diagnosis and monitoring of celiac disease-changing utility of serology and histologic measures: expert review. Gastroenterology 2019;156:885–889
24. Cauley JA, Hochberg MC, Lui L-Y, et al. Long-term risk of incident vertebral fractures. JAMA 2007;298:2761–2767
25. Kanis JA, Johnell O, De Laet C, et al. A meta-analysis of previous fracture and subsequent fracture risk. Bone 2004;35:375–382
26. Pedersen AB, Ehrenstein V, Sz epligeti SK, et al. Thirty-five-year trends in first-time hospitalization for hip fracture, 1-year mortality, and the prognostic impact of comorbidity: a Danish nationwide cohort study, 1980-2014. Epidemiology 2017;28:898–905
27. Tajeu GS, Delzell E, Smith W, et al. Death, debility, and destitution following hip fracture. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci 2014;69:346–353
28. Miao J, Brismar K, Nyr en O, Ugarph-Morawski A, Ye W. Elevated hip fracture risk in type 1 diabetic patients: a population-based cohort study in Sweden. Diabetes Care 2005;28:2850–2855
29. Wang H, Ba Y, Xing Q, Du J-L. Diabetes mellitus and the risk of fractures at specific sites: a meta-analysis. BMJ Open 2019;9:e024067
30. Weber DR, Haynes K, Leonard MB, Willi SM, Denburg MR. Type 1 diabetes is associated with an increased risk of fracture across the life span: a population-based cohort study using The Health Improvement Network (THIN). Diabetes Care 2015;38:1913–1920
31. Leanza G, Maddaloni E, Pitocco D, et al. Risk factors for fragility fractures in type 1 diabetes. Bone 2019;125:194–199
32. Janghorbani M, Van Dam RM, Willett WC, Hu FB. Systematic review of type 1 and type 2 diabetes and fracture risk. Osteoporos Int 2006;17:1–16
33. Vavanikunnel J, Charlier S, Becker C, et al. Association between glycemic control and risk of fracture in diabetic patients: a nested case-control study. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2019;104:1645–1654
34. Strotmeyer ES, Cauley JA, Schwartz AV, et al. Nontraumatic fracture risk with diabetes mellitus and impaired fasting glucose in older white and black adults: the health, aging, and body composition study. Arch Intern Med 2005;165:1612–1617
35. Schwartz AV, Vittinghoff E, Sellmeyer DE, et al.; Health, Aging, and Body Composition Study. Diabetes-related complications, glycemic control, and falls in older adults. Diabetes Care 2008;31:391–396
36. Loke YK, Singh S, Furberg CD. Long-term use of thiazolidinediones and fractures in type 2 diabetes: a meta-analysis. CMAJ 2009;180:32–39
37. Dormandy J, Bhattacharya M, van Troostenburg de Bruyn A-R; PROactive Investigators. Safety and tolerability of pioglitazone in high-risk patients with type 2 diabetes: an overview of data from PROactive. Drug Saf 2009;32:187–202

---

# Comprehensive Medical Evaluation and Assessment of Comorbidities

# Diabetes Care Volume 48, Supplement 1, January 2025

# References

1. Schwartz AV, Chen H, Ambrosius WT, et al. A scoping review. J Nutr Health Aging 2017;21:527–538
2. Hidayat K, Du X, Wu M-J, Shi B-M. The use of metformin, insulin, sulphonylureas, and thiazolidinediones and the risk of fracture: systematic review and meta-analysis of observational studies. Obes Rev 2019;20:1494–1503
3. Piccoli A, Cannata F, Strollo R, et al. Sclerostin regulation, microarchitecture, and advanced glycation end-products in the bone of elderly women with type 2 diabetes. J Bone Miner Res 2020;35:2415–2422
4. Leanza G, Cannata F, Faraj M, et al. Bone canonical Wnt signaling is downregulated in type 2 diabetes and associates with higher advanced glycation end-products (AGEs) content and reduced bone strength. Elife 2024;12:RP90437
5. Tramontana F, Napoli N, Litwack-Harrison S, et al. More rapid bone mineral density loss in older men with diabetes: the Osteoporotic Fractures in Men (MrOS) study. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 24 February 2024 [Epub ahead of print]. DOI: 10.1210/clinem/dgae045
6. Ferrari SL, Abrahamsen B, Napoli N, et al.; Bone and Diabetes Working Group of IOF. Diagnosis and management of bone fragility in diabetes: an emerging challenge. Osteoporos Int 2018;29:2585–2596
7. Leslie WD, Johansson H, McCloskey EV, Harvey NC, Kanis JA, Hans D. Comparison of methods for improving fracture risk assessment in diabetes: the Manitoba BMD registry. J Bone Miner Res 2018;33:1923–1930
8. Ferrari S, Eastell R, Napoli N, et al. Denosumab in postmenopausal women with osteoporosis and diabetes: subgroup analysis of FREEDOM and FREEDOM extension. Bone 2020;134:115268
9. LeBoff MS, Greenspan SL, Insogna KL, et al. The clinician’s guide to prevention and treatment of osteoporosis. Osteoporos Int 2022;33:2049–2102
10. Napoli N, Conte C, Eastell R, et al. Bone turnover markers do not predict fracture risk in type 2 diabetes. J Bone Miner Res 2020;35:2363–2371
11. International Society for Pediatric and Adolescent Diabetes. ISPAD Clinical Practice Consensus Guidelines 2022. Accessed 19 August 2024. Available from https://www.ispad.org/page/ISPADGuidelines2022
12. Armamento-Villareal R, Aguirre L, Napoli N, et al. Changes in thigh muscle volume predict bone mineral density response to lifestyle therapy in frail, obese older adults. Osteoporos Int 2014;25:551–558
13. Sinclair AJ, Abdelhafiz A, Dunning T, et al. An international position statement on the management of frailty in diabetes mellitus: summary of recommendations. J Frailty Aging 2017;7:10–20
14. Ebeling PR, Adler RA, Jones G, et al. Management of endocrine disease: therapeutics of vitamin D. Eur J Endocrinol 2018;179:R239–R259
15. Maddaloni E, Cavallari I, Napoli N, Conte C. Vitamin D and diabetes mellitus. Front Horm Res 2018;50:161–176
16. Iolascon G, Gimigliano R, Bianco M, et al. Are dietary supplements and nutraceuticals effective for musculoskeletal health and cognitive function? Osteoporos Int 2019;30:1923–1940
17. Chai S, Liu F, Yang Z, et al. Risk of fracture with dipeptidyl peptidase-4 inhibitors, glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor agonists, or sodium-glucose cotransporter-2 inhibitors in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus: a systematic review and network meta-analysis of 177 randomized controlled trials with a median follow-up of 26 weeks. Front Pharmacol 2022;13:825417
18. Rosenstock J, Wysham C, Fras JP, et al. Efficacy and safety of a novel dual GIP and GLP-1 receptor agonist tirzepatide in patients with type 2 diabetes (SURPASS-1): a double-blind, randomised, phase 3 trial. Lancet 2021;398:143–155
19. Bilezikian JP, Watts NB, Usiskin K, et al. Evaluation of bone mineral density and bone health in individuals with type 2 diabetes and other cardiovascular risk factors: a consensus report. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2020;105:1–10

---

# Comprehensive Medical Evaluation and Assessment of Comorbidities

the Action to Control Cardiovascular Risk in observational evidence. J Periodontol 2013;84: S135–S152

Diabetes-Memory in Diabetes (ACCORD-MIND) trial. Diabetes Care 2009;32:221–226

110. Launer LJ, Miller ME, Williamson JD, et al.; ACCORD MIND Investigators. Effects of intensive glucose lowering on brain structure and function in people with type 2 diabetes (ACCORD MIND): a randomised open-label substudy. Lancet Neurol 2011;10:969–977

111. McCoy RG, Galindo RJ, Swarna KS, et al. Sociodemographic, clinical, and treatment-related factors associated with hyperglycemic crises among adults with type 1 or type 2 diabetes in the US from 2014 to 2020. JAMA Netw Open 2021;4:e2123471

112. Mair ML, Athavale R, Abdelhafiz AH. Practical considerations for managing patients with diabetes and dementia. Expert Rev Endocrinol Metab 2017; 12:429–440

113. Punthakee Z, Miller ME, Launer LJ, et al.; ACCORD-MIND Investigators. Poor cognitive function and risk of severe hypoglycemia in type 2 diabetes: post hoc epidemiologic analysis of the ACCORD trial. Diabetes Care 2012;35:787–793

114. Lacy ME, Gilsanz P, Eng C, Beeri MS, Karter AJ, Whitmer RA. Severe hypoglycemia and cognitive function in older adults with type 1 diabetes: the Study of Longevity in Diabetes (SOLID). Diabetes Care 2020;43:541–548

115. Lee AK, Rawlings AM, Lee CJ, et al. Severe hypoglycaemia, mild cognitive impairment, dementia and brain volumes in older adults with type 2 diabetes: the Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities (ARIC) cohort study. Diabetologia 2018;61:1956–1965

116. Ye M, Yang Q, Zhang L, et al. Effect of hypoglycemic events on cognitive function in individuals with type 2 diabetes mellitus: a dose-response meta-analysis. Front Neurol 2024;15: 1394499

117. Mattishent K, Loke YK. Bi-directional interaction between hypoglycaemia and cognitive impairment in elderly patients treated with glucose-lowering agents: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Diabetes Obes Metab 2016;18:135–141

118. Giorda CB, Ozzello A, Gentile S, et al.; HYPOS-1 Study Group of AMD. Incidence and risk factors for severe and symptomatic hypoglycemia in type 1 diabetes. Results of the HYPOS-1 study. Acta Diabetol 2015;52:845–853

119. Jacobson AM, Ryan CM, Braffett BH, et al.; DCCT/EDIC Research Group. Cognitive performance declines in older adults with type 1 diabetes: results from 32 years of follow-up in the DCCT and EDIC study. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol 2021;9:436–445

120. Khader YS, Dauod AS, El-Qaderi SS, Alkafajei A, Batayha WQ. Periodontal status of diabetics compared with nondiabetics: a meta-analysis. J Diabetes Complications 2006;20:59–68

121. Casanova L, Hughes FJ, Preshaw PM. Diabetes and periodontal disease: a two-way relationship. Br Dent J 2014;217:433–437

122. Eke PI, Thornton-Evans GO, Wei L, Borgnakke WS, Dye BA, Genco RJ. Periodontitis in US adults: National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey 2009-2014. J Am Dent Assoc 2018;149:576–588.e576

123. Borgnakke WS, Ylöstalo PV, Taylor GW, Genco RJ. Effect of periodontal disease on diabetes: systematic review of epidemiologic studies. S81

124. Simpson TC, Clarkson JE, Worthington HV, et al. Treatment of periodontitis for glycaemic control in people with diabetes mellitus. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2022;4:CD004714

125. D’Aiuto F, Gkranias N, Bhowruth D, et al.; TASTE Group. Systemic effects of periodontitis treatment in patients with type 2 diabetes: a 12 month, single-centre, investigator-masked, randomised trial. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol 2018;6:954–965

126. Elangovan S, Hertzman-Miller R, Karimbux N, Giddon D. A framework for physician-dentist collaboration in diabetes and periodontitis. Clin Diabetes 2014;32:188–192

127. Herrera D, Sanz M, Shapira L, et al. Association between periodontal diseases and cardiovascular diseases, diabetes and respiratory diseases: consensus report of the Joint Workshop by the European Federation of Periodontology (EFP) and the European arm of the World Organization of Family Doctors (WONCA Europe). J Clin Periodontol 2023;50:819–841

128. Lalla E, Papapanou PN. Diabetes mellitus and periodontitis: a tale of two common interrelated diseases. Nat Rev Endocrinol 2011;7:738–748

129. Christgau M, Palitzsch KD, Schmalz G, Kreiner U, Frenzel S. Healing response to non-surgical periodontal therapy in patients with diabetes mellitus: clinical, microbiological, and immunologic results. J Clin Periodontol 1998;25:112–124

130. Retzepi M, Donos N. The effect of diabetes mellitus on osseous healing. Clin Oral Implants Res 2010;21:673–681

131. United States Code. Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990. Pub. L. No. 101–336 42 U.S.C. § 2. 104 Stat. 328. p. 101-336.

132. United States Code. Americans with Disabilities Act Amendments Act of 2008. Pub. L. No. 110–325 42 U.S.C.A. § 12101 et seq.

133. Wong E, Backholer K, Gearon E, et al. Diabetes and risk of physical disability in adults: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol 2013;1:106–114

134. Tomic D, Shaw JE, Magliano DJ. The burden and risks of emerging complications of diabetes mellitus. Nat Rev Endocrinol 2022;18:525–539

135. Lisy K, Campbell JM, Tufanaru C, Moola S, Lockwood C. The prevalence of disability among people with cancer, cardiovascular disease, chronic respiratory disease and/or diabetes: a systematic review. Int J Evid Based Healthc 2018;16:154–166

136. Gregg EW, Menke A. Diabetes and disability. In Diabetes in America, 3rd ed. Cowie CC, Casagrande SS, Menke A, et al., Eds. Bethesda, MD, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, 2018. Available from https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/33651544

137. Khan KS, Andersen H. The impact of diabetic neuropathy on activities of daily living, postural balance and risk of falls - a systematic review. J Diabetes Sci Technol 2022;16:289–294

138. Elafros MA, Andersen H, Bennett DL, et al. Towards prevention of diabetic peripheral neuropathy: clinical presentation, pathogenesis, and new treatments. Lancet Neurol 2022;21:922–936

139. Selvarajah D, Kar D, Khunti K, et al. Diabetic peripheral neuropathy: advances in diagnosis and strategies for screening and early intervention. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol 2019;7:938–948

140. Fatma S, Noohu MM. Classification of functionality of people with diabetic peripheral neuropathy based on international classification of functioning, disability and health core set (ICF-CS) of diabetes mellitus. J Diabetes Metab Disord 2020;19:213–221

141. Zhang Y, Lazzarini PA, McPhail SM, van Netten JJ, Armstrong DG, Pacella RE. Global disability burdens of diabetes-related lower-extremity complications in 1990 and 2016. Diabetes Care 2020;43:964–974

142. Tsai Y-H, Chuang L-L, Lee Y-J, Chiu C-J. How does diabetes accelerate normal aging? An examination of ADL, IADL, and mobility disability in middle-aged and older adults with and without diabetes. Diabetes Res Clin Pract 2021;182: 109114

143. Streckmann F, Balke M, Cavaletti G, et al. Exercise and neuropathy: systematic review with meta-analysis. Sports Med 2022;52:1043–1065

144. Jing X, Chen J, Dong Y, et al. Related factors of quality of life of type 2 diabetes patients: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Health Qual Life Outcomes 2018;16:189

145. Yoon S-J, Kim K-I. Frailty and disability in diabetes. Ann Geriatr Med Res 2019;23:165–169

146. World Health Organization. WHO Disability Assessment Schedule 2.0 (WHODAS 2.0). Accessed 26 September 2024. Available from https://www.who.int/standards/classifications/international-classification-of-functioning-disability-and-health/who-disability-assessment-schedule

147. Diabetes Distress Assessment and Resource Center. Diabetes Distress Scale (DDS). Accessed 26 September 2024. Available from https://diabetesdistress.org/take-dd-survey/

148. Hill-Briggs F, Adler NE, Berkowitz SA, et al. Social determinants of health and diabetes: a scientific review. Diabetes Care 2020;44:258–279

149. Tan T-W, Shih C-D, Concha-Moore KC, et al. Disparities in outcomes of patients admitted with diabetic foot infections. PLoS One 2019;14: e0215532

150. Skrepnek GH, Mills JL, Armstrong DG. A diabetic emergency one million feet long: disparities and burdens of illness among diabetic foot ulcer cases within emergency departments in the United States, 2006-2010. PLoS One 2015; 10:e0134914

151. Lecube A, Hernández C, Genescà J, Simó R. Proinflammatory cytokines, insulin resistance, and insulin secretion in chronic hepatitis C patients: a case-control study. Diabetes Care 2006;29:1096–1101

152. Hum J, Jou JH, Green PK, et al. Improvement in glycemic control of type 2 diabetes after successful treatment of hepatitis C virus. Diabetes Care 2017;40:1173–1180

153. Carnovale C, Pozzi M, Dassano A, et al. The impact of a successful treatment of hepatitis C virus on glyco-metabolic control in diabetic patients: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Acta Diabetol 2019;56:341–354

154. Dhindsa S, Miller MG, McWhirter CL, et al. Testosterone concentrations in diabetic and non-diabetic obese men. Diabetes Care 2010;33:1186–1192

---

# Comprehensive Medical Evaluation and Assessment of Comorbidities

# Diabetes Care Volume 48, Supplement 1, January 2025

1. Grossmann M. Low testosterone in men with type 2 diabetes: significance and treatment. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2011;96:2341–2353
2. Bhasin S, Cunningham GR, Hayes FJ, et al.; Task Force, Endocrine Society. Testosterone therapy in men with androgen deficiency syndromes: an Endocrine Society clinical practice guideline. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2010;95:2536–2559
3. Bhasin S, Brito JP, Cunningham GR, et al. Testosterone therapy in men with hypogonadism: an Endocrine Society clinical practice guideline. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2018;103:1715–1744
4. Shindel AW, Lue TF, Anawalt B, et al. Medical and surgical therapy of erectile dysfunction. In Endotext. Feingold KR, Anawalt B, Blackman MR, et al., Eds. South Dartmouth, MA, MDText.com, 2000. Available from https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25905163
5. Allen MS, Walter EE. Erectile dysfunction: an umbrella review of meta-analyses of risk factors, treatment, and prevalence outcomes. J Sex Med 2019;16:531–541
6. Kouidrat Y, Pizzol D, Cosco T, et al. High prevalence of erectile dysfunction in diabetes: a systematic review and meta-analysis of 145 studies. Diabet Med 2017;34:1185–1192
7. Araujo AB, Mohr BA, McKinlay JB. Changes in sexual function in middle-aged and older men: longitudinal data from the Massachusetts Male Aging Study. J Am Geriatr Soc 2004;52:1502–1509
8. Grover SA, Lowensteyn I, Kaouache M, et al. The prevalence of erectile dysfunction in the primary care setting: importance of risk factors for diabetes and vascular disease. Arch Intern Med 2006;166:213–219
9. Ma RC-W, So W-Y, Yang X, et al. Erectile dysfunction predicts coronary heart disease in type 2 diabetes. J Am Coll Cardiol 2008;51:2045–2050
10. Gazzaruso C, Solerte SB, Pujia A, et al. Erectile dysfunction as a predictor of cardiovascular events and death in diabetic patients with angiographically proven asymptomatic coronary artery disease: a potential protective role for statins and 5-phosphodiesterase inhibitors. J Am Coll Cardiol 2008;51:2040–2044
11. Kalter-Leibovici O, Wainstein J, Ziv A, et al.; Israel Diabetes Research Group (IDRG) Investigators. Clinical, socioeconomic, and lifestyle parameters associated with erectile dysfunction among diabetic men. Diabetes Care 2005;28:1739–1744
12. De Berardis G, Pellegrini F, Franciosi M, et al.; QuED (Quality of Care and Outcomes in Type 2 Diabetes) Study Group. Longitudinal assessment of quality of life in patients with type 2 diabetes and self-reported erectile dysfunction. Diabetes Care 2005;28:2637–2643
13. Navaneethan SD, Vecchio M, Johnson DW, et al. Prevalence and correlates of self-reported sexual dysfunction in CKD: a meta-analysis of observational studies. Am J Kidney Dis 2010;56:670–685
14. Hackett G, Kirby M, Wylie K, et al. British society for sexual medicine guidelines on the management of erectile dysfunction in men-2017. J Sex Med 2018;15:430–457
15. Corona G, Rastrelli G, Morgentaler A, Sforza A, Mannucci E. Meta-analysis of results of testosterone therapy on sexual function based on international index of erectile function scores. Eur Urol 2017;72:1000–1011
16. Lindau ST, Tang H, Gomero A, et al. Sexuality among middle-aged and older adults with diagnosed and undiagnosed diabetes: a national, population-based study. Diabetes Care 2010;33:2202–2210
17. Maiorino MI, Bellastella G, Esposito K. Diabetes and sexual dysfunction: current perspectives. Diabetes Metab Syndr Obes 2014;7:95–105
18. Pontiroli AE, Cortelazzi D, Morabito A. Female sexual dysfunction and diabetes: a systematic review and meta-analysis. J Sex Med 2013;10:1044–1051
19. Van Cauwenberghe J, Enzlin P, Nefs G, et al. Prevalence of and risk factors for sexual dysfunctions in adults with type 1 or type 2 diabetes: results from Diabetes MILES - Flanders. Diabet Med 2022;39:e14676
20. Pyrgidis N, Mykoniatis I, Tishukov M, et al. Sexual dysfunction in women with end-stage renal disease: a systematic review and meta-analysis. J Sex Med 2021;18:936–945
21. Haugstvedt A, Jørgensen J, Strandberg RB, et al. Sexual dysfunction in women with type 1 diabetes in Norway: a cross-sectional study on the prevalence and associations with physical and psychosocial complications. Diabet Med 2022;39:e14704
22. Buskoven MEH, Kjørholt EKH, Strandberg RB, Søfteland E, Haugstvedt A. Sexual dysfunction in women with type 1 diabetes in Norway: a qualitative study of women’s experiences. Diabet Med 2022;39:e14856
23. Hendrieckx C, Halliday JA, Russell-Green S, et al. Adults with diabetes distress often want to talk with their health professionals about it: findings from an audit of 4 Australian specialist diabetes clinics. Can J Diabetes 2020;44:473–480
24. Di Stasi V, Maseroli E, Vignozzi L. Female sexual dysfunction in diabetes: mechanisms, diagnosis and treatment. Curr Diabetes Rev 2022;18:e171121198002
25. Wing RR, Bond DS, Gendrano IN, 3rd, et al.; Sexual Dysfunction Subgroup of the Look AHEAD Research Group. Effect of intensive lifestyle intervention on sexual dysfunction in women with type 2 diabetes: results from an ancillary Look AHEAD study. Diabetes Care 2013;36:2937–2944
26. Rinella ME, Lazarus JV, Ratziu V, et al. A multisociety Delphi consensus statement on new fatty liver disease nomenclature. Hepatology 2023;78:1966–1986
27. Rinella ME, Neuschwander-Tetri BA, Siddiqui MS, et al. AASLD practice guidance on the clinical assessment and management of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. Hepatology 2023;77:1797–1835
28. Lomonaco R, Godinez Leiva E, Bril F, et al. Advanced liver fibrosis is common in patients with type 2 diabetes followed in the outpatient setting: the need for systematic screening. Diabetes Care 2021;44:399–406
29. Ciardullo S, Monti T, Perseghin G. High prevalence of advanced liver fibrosis assessed by transient elastography among U.S. adults with type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Care 2021;44:519–525
30. Barb D, Repetto EM, Stokes ME, Shankar SS, Cusi K. Type 2 diabetes mellitus increases the risk of hepatic fibrosis in individuals with obesity. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol 2022;20:e1456–e1468

---

# Comprehensive Medical Evaluation and Assessment of Comorbidities

# References

1. Kanwal F, Shubrook JH, Younossi Z, et al. Preparing for the NASH epidemic: a call to action. Diabetes Care 2021;44:2162–2172
2. Angulo P, Kleiner DE, Dam-Larsen S, et al. Liver fibrosis, but no other histologic features, is associated with long-term outcomes of patients with nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. Gastroenterology 2015;149:389–397.e310
3. Ekstedt M, Hagström H, Nasr P, et al. Fibrosis stage is the strongest predictor for disease-specific mortality in NAFLD after up to 33 years of follow-up. Hepatology 2015;61:1547–1554
4. Taylor RS, Taylor RJ, Bayliss S, et al. Association between fibrosis stage and outcomes of patients with nonalcoholic fatty liver disease: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Gastroenterology 2020;158:1611–1625.e1612
5. Sanyal AJ, Van Natta ML, Clark J, et al.; NASH Clinical Research Network (CRN). Prospective study of outcomes in adults with nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. N Engl J Med 2021;385:1559–1569
6. Cusi K, Isaacs S, Barb D, et al. American Association of Clinical Endocrinology clinical practice guideline for the diagnosis and management of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease in primary care and endocrinology clinical settings: co-sponsored by the American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases (AASLD). Endocr Pract 2022;28:528–562
7. Kanwal F, Shubrook JH, Adams LA, et al. Clinical care pathway for the risk stratification and management of patients with nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. Gastroenterology 2021;161:1657–1669
8. Gellert-Kristensen H, Richardson TG, Davey Smith G, Nordestgaard BG, Tybjaerg-Hansen A, Stender S. Combined effect of PNPLA3, TM6SF2, and HSD17B13 variants on risk of cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma in the general population. Hepatology 2020;72:845–856
9. Stender S, Kozlitina J, Nordestgaard BG, Tybjærg-Hansen A, Hobbs HH, Cohen JC. Adiposity amplifies the genetic risk of fatty liver disease conferred by multiple loci. Nat Genet 2017;49:842–847
10. Mantovani A, Byrne CD, Bonora E, Targher G. Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease and risk of incident type 2 diabetes: a meta-analysis. Diabetes Care 2018;41:372–382
11. Duell PB, Welty FK, Miller M, et al.; American Heart Association Council on Arteriosclerosis, Thrombosis and Vascular Biology; Council on Hypertension; Council on the Kidney in Cardiovascular Disease; Council on Lifestyle and Cardiometabolic Health; and Council on Peripheral Vascular Disease. Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease and cardiovascular risk: a scientific statement from the American Heart Association. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 2022;42:e168–e185
12. Mantovani A, Csermely A, Petracca G, et al. Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease and risk of fatal and non-fatal cardiovascular events: an updated systematic review and meta-analysis. Lancet Gastroenterol Hepatol 2021;6:903–913
13. Ciardullo S, Ballabeni C, Trevisan R, Perseghin G. Liver stiffness, albuminuria and chronic kidney disease in patients with NAFLD: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Biomolecules 2022;12:105
14. Musso G, Gambino R, Tabibian JH, et al. Association of non-alcoholic fatty liver disease with chronic kidney disease: a systematic review and meta-analysis. PLoS Med 2014;11:e1001680
15. Song D, Li C, Wang Z, Zhao Y, Shen B, Zhao W. Association of non-alcoholic fatty liver disease with diabetic retinopathy in type 2 diabetic patients: a meta-analysis of observational studies. J Diabetes Investig 2021;12:1471–1479
16. Arab JP, Dirchwolf M, Alvares-da-Silva MR, et al. Latin American Association for the Study of the Liver (ALEH) practice guidance for the diagnosis and treatment of non-alcoholic fatty liver disease. Ann Hepatol 2020;19:674–690
17. Elhence A, Anand A, Biswas S, et al. Compensated advanced chronic liver disease in nonalcoholic fatty liver disease: two-step strategy is better than Baveno criteria. Dig Dis Sci 2023;68:1016–1025
18. Wong VWS, Zelber-Sagi S, Cusi K, et al. Management of NAFLD in primary care settings. Liver Int 2022;42:2377–2389
19. Lazarus JV, Anstee QM, Hagström H, et al. Defining comprehensive models of care for NAFLD. Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol 2021;18:717–729
20. Cusi K, Budd J, Johnson E, Shubrook J. Making sense of the nonalcoholic fatty liver disease clinical practice guidelines: what clinicians need to know. Diabetes Spectr 2024;37:29–38
21. Anstee QM, Lawitz EJ, Alkhouri N, et al. Noninvasive tests accurately identify advanced liver fibrosis due to NASH: baseline data from the STELLAR trials. Hepatology 2019;70:1521–1530
22. Lee J, Vali Y, Boursier J, et al. Prognostic accuracy of FIB-4, NAFLD fibrosis score and APRI for NAFLD-related events: a systematic review. Liver Int 2021;41:261–270
23. Chan W-K, Treeprasertsuk S, Goh GB-B, et al. Optimizing use of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease fibrosis score, fibrosis-4 score, and liver stiffness measurement to identify patients with advanced fibrosis. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol 2019;17:2570–2580.e2537
24. Petta S, Wai-Sun Wong V, Bugianesi E, et al. Impact of obesity and alanine aminotransferase levels on the diagnostic accuracy for advanced liver fibrosis of noninvasive tools in patients with nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. Am J Gastroenterol 2019;114:916–928
25. Vali Y, Lee J, Boursier J, et al.; LITMUS Systematic Review Team. Enhanced liver fibrosis test for the non-invasive diagnosis of fibrosis in patients with NAFLD: a systematic review and meta-analysis. J Hepatol 2020;73:252–262
26. Srivastava A, Gailer R, Tanwar S, et al. Prospective evaluation of a primary care referral pathway for patients with non-alcoholic fatty liver disease. J Hepatol 2019;71:371–378
27. Saarinen K, Färkkilä M, Jula A, et al. Enhanced liver fibrosis test predicts liver-related outcomes in the general population. JHEP Rep 2023;5:100765
28. Kjaergaard M, Lindvig KP, Thorhauge KH, et al. Using the ELF test, FIB-4 and NAFLD fibrosis score to screen the population for liver disease. J Hepatol 2023;79:277–286
29. Zoncap e M, Liguori A, Tsochatzis EA. Non-invasive testing and risk-stratification in patients with MASLD. Eur J Intern Med 2024;122:11–19
30. Andersson A, Kelly M, Imajo K, et al. Clinical utility of magnetic resonance imaging biomarkers for identifying nonalcoholic steatohepatitis patients at high risk of progression: a multicenter pooled data and meta-analysis. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol 2022;20:2451–2461
31. Long MT, Noureddin M, Lim JK. AGA clinical practice update: diagnosis and management of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. Gastroenterology 2022;162:1231–1245

---

S84       Comprehensive Medical Evaluation and Assessment of Comorbidities                                                       Diabetes Care Volume 48, Supplement 1, January 2025

nonalcoholic fatty liver disease in lean individuals:               trial of subcutaneous semaglutide in nonalcoholic                patients with type 2 diabetes: a 24-week, ran-
expert review. Gastroenterology 2022;163:764–                       steatohepatitis. N Engl J Med 2021;384:1113–1124                 domized, placebo-controlled trial. Diabetes Obes
774.e761                                                            263. National Library of Medicine, National                     Metab 2014;16:147–158
245. Cusi K. Nonalcoholic steatohepatitis in                        Center for Biotechnology Information. Research                  276. Armstrong MJ, Gaunt P, Aithal GP, et al.;
nonobese patients: not so different after all.                      Study on Whether Semaglutide Works in People                    LEAN Trial Team. Liraglutide safety and efficacy in
Hepatology 2017;65:4–7                                              With Non-Alcoholic Steatohepatitis (NASH)                       patients with non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (LEAN):
246. Loomba R, Friedman SL, Shulman GI.                             (ESSENCE). Accessed 23 September 2024.                          a multicentre, double-blind, randomised, placebo-
Mechanisms and disease consequences of non-                         Available from https://clinicaltrials.gov/study/                controlled phase 2 study. Lancet 2016;387:679–
alcoholic fatty liver disease. Cell 2021;184:2537–                  NCT04822181                                                     690
2564                                                                264. Belfort R, Harrison SA, Brown K, et al. A                  277. Gastaldelli A, Cusi K, Fernández Landó L,
247. Cusi K. Role of obesity and lipotoxicity in                    placebo-controlled trial of pioglitazone in                     Bray R, Brouwers B, Rodriguez A. Effect of
the development of nonalcoholic steatohepatitis:                    subjects with nonalcoholic steatohepatitis. N                   tirzepatide versus insulin degludec on liver fat
pathophysiology and clinical implications. Gas-                     Engl J Med 2006;355:2297–2307                                   content and abdominal adipose tissue in people
troenterology 2012;142:711–725.e716                                 265. Cusi K, Orsak B, Bril F, et al. Long-term                  with type 2 diabetes (SURPASS-3 MRI): a
248. Schuppan D, Surabattula R, Wang XY.                            pioglitazone treatment for patients with                        substudy of the randomised, open-label, parallel-
Determinants of fibrosis progression and regression                 nonalcoholic steatohepatitis and prediabetes or                 group, phase 3 SURPASS-3 trial. Lancet Diabetes
in NASH. J Hepatol 2018;68:238–250                                  type 2 diabetes mellitus: a randomized trial. Ann               Endocrinol 2022;10:393–406
249. Promrat K, Kleiner DE, Niemeier HM, et al.                     Intern Med 2016;165:305–315                                     278. Loomba R, Hartman ML, Lawitz EJ, et al.;
Randomized controlled trial testing the effects of                  266. Sanyal AJ, Chalasani N, Kowdley KV, et al.;                SYNERGY-NASH Investigators. Tirzepatide for
weight loss on nonalcoholic steatohepatitis.                        NASH CRN. Pioglitazone, vitamin E, or placebo for               metabolic dysfunction-associated steatohepatitis
Hepatology 2010;51:121–129                                          nonalcoholic steatohepatitis. N Engl J Med 2010;                with liver fibrosis. N Engl J Med 2024;391:
250. Vilar-Gomez E, Martinez-Perez Y, Calzadilla-                   362:1675–1685                                                   299–310
Bertot L, et al. Weight loss through lifestyle                      267. Aithal GP, Thomas JA, Kaye PV, et al.                      279. Sanyal AJ, Bedossa P, Fraessdorf M, et al.;
modification significantly reduces features of                      Randomized, placebo-controlled trial of pioglitazone            1404-0043 Trial Investigators. A phase 2 randomized
nonalcoholic steatohepatitis. Gastroenterology                      in nondiabetic subjects with nonalcoholic steato-               trial of survodutide in MASH and fibrosis. N Engl J
2015;149:367–378.e365                                               hepatitis. Gastroenterology 2008;135:1176–1184                  Med 2024;391:311–319
251. Younossi ZM, Zelber-Sagi S, Henry L, Gerber                    268. Huang J-F, Dai C-Y, Huang C-F, et al. First-in-           280. Cusi K, Bril F, Barb D, et al. Effect of
LH. Lifestyle interventions in nonalcoholic fatty                   Asian double-blind randomized trial to assess the               canagliflozin treatment on hepatic triglyceride
liver disease. Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol 2023;                  efficacy and safety of insulin sensitizer in                    content and glucose metabolism in patients with
20:708–722                                                          nonalcoholic steatohepatitis patients. Hepatol Int              type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Obes Metab 2019;21:
252. Sargeant JA, Gray LJ, Bodicoat DH, et al.                      2021;15:1136–1147                                               812–821
The effect of exercise training on intrahepatic                     269. Sathyanarayana P, Jogi M, Muthupillai R,                   281. Kahl S, Gancheva S, Straßburger K, et al.
triglyceride and hepatic insulin sensitivity: a                     Krishnamurthy R, Samson SL, Bajaj M. Effects of                 Empagliflozin effectively lowers liver fat content
systematic review and meta-analysis. Obes Rev                       combined exenatide and pioglitazone therapy on                  in well-controlled type 2 diabetes: a randomized,
2018;19:1446–1459                                                   hepatic fat content in type 2 diabetes. Obesity                 double-blind, phase 4, placebo-controlled trial.
253. Kanwal F, Kramer JR, Li L, et al. Effect of                    (Silver Spring) 2011;19:2310–2315                               Diabetes Care 2020;43:298–305
metabolic traits on the risk of cirrhosis and                       270. Abdul-Ghani M, Migahid O, Megahed A,                       282. Latva-Rasku A, Honka M-J, Kullberg J, et al.
hepatocellular cancer in nonalcoholic fatty liver                   DeFronzo RA, Al-Ozairi E, Jayyousi A. Combination               The SGLT2 inhibitor dapagliflozin reduces liver fat
disease. Hepatology 2020;71:808–819                                 therapy with pioglitazone/exenatide improves                    but does not affect tissue insulin sensitivity: a
254. Younossi Z, Stepanova M, Sanyal AJ, et al.                     beta-cell function and produces superior glycaemic              randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled
The conundrum of cryptogenic cirrhosis: adverse                     control compared with basal/bolus insulin in                    study with 8-week treatment in type 2 diabetes
outcomes without treatment options. J Hepatol                       poorly controlled type 2 diabetes: a 3-year follow-             patients. Diabetes Care 2019;42:931–937
2018;69:1365–1370                                                   up of the Qatar study. Diabetes Obes Metab                      283. Harrison SA, Bedossa P, Guy CD, et al.;
255. Castera L, Cusi K. Diabetes and cirrhosis:                     2020;22:2287–2294                                               MAESTRO-NASH Investigators. A phase 3, ran-
current concepts on diagnosis and management.                       271. Lavynenko O, Abdul-Ghani M, Alatrach M,                    domized, controlled trial of resmetirom in NASH
Hepatology 2023;77:2128–2146                                        et al. Combination therapy with pioglitazone/                   with liver fibrosis. N Engl J Med 2024;390:497–509
256. Patel Chavez C, Cusi K, Kadiyala S. The                        exenatide/metformin reduces the prevalence of                   284. Cusi K. Selective agonists of thyroid
emerging role of glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor                   hepatic fibrosis and steatosis: the efficacy and                hormone receptor beta for the treatment of
agonists for the management of NAFLD. J Clin                        durability of initial combination therapy for type 2            NASH. N Engl J Med 2024;390:559–561
Endocrinol Metab 2022;107:29–38                                     diabetes (EDICT). Diabetes Obes Metab 2022;24:                  285. Noureddin M, Charlton MR, Harrison SA,
257. Gastaldelli A, Cusi K. From NASH to diabetes                   899–907                                                         et al. Expert panel recommendations: practical
and from diabetes to NASH: mechanisms and                           272. Ahrén B, Masmiquel L, Kumar H, et al.                      clinical applications for initiating and monitoring
treatment options. JHEP Rep 2019;1:312–328                          Efficacy and safety of once-weekly semaglutide                  resmetirom in patients with MASH/NASH and
258. Budd J, Cusi K. Role of agents for the                         versus once-daily sitagliptin as an add-on to                   moderate to noncirrhotic advanced fibrosis. Clin
treatment of diabetes in the management of                          metformin, thiazolidinediones, or both, in patients             Gastroenterol Hepatol. 20 July 2024 [Epub ahead
nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. Curr Diab Rep                     with type 2 diabetes (SUSTAIN 2): a 56-week,                    of print]. DOI: 10.1016/j.cgh.2024.07.003
2020;20:59                                                          double-blind, phase 3a, randomised trial. Lancet                286. Chen VL, Morgan TR, Rotman Y, et al.
259. Ussher JR, Drucker DJ. Glucagon-like peptide 1                 Diabetes Endocrinol 2017;5:341–354                              Resmetirom therapy for metabolic dysfunction-
receptor agonists: cardiovascular benefits and                      273. Noureddin M, Jones C, Alkhouri N, Gomez                    associated steatotic liver disease: October 2024
mechanisms of action. Nat Rev Cardiol 2023;20:                      EV, Dieterich DT, Rinella ME; NASHNET. Screening                updates to AASLD Practice Guidance. Hepatology.
463–474                                                             for nonalcoholic fatty liver disease in persons                 18 October 2024 [Epub ahead of print]. DOI:
260. Musso G, Cassader M, Paschetta E, Gambino                      with type 2 diabetes in the United States is cost-              10.1097/HEP.0000000000001112
R. Thiazolidinediones and advanced liver fibrosis                   effective: a comprehensive cost-utility analysis.               287. Loomba R, Abdelmalek MF, Armstrong MJ,
in nonalcoholic steatohepatitis: a meta-analysis.                   Gastroenterology 2020;159:1985–1987.e1984                       et al.; NN9931-4492 Investigators. Semaglutide 2.4
JAMA Intern Med 2017;177:633–640                                    274. Mahady SE, Wong G, Craig JC, George J.                     mg once weekly in patients with non-alcoholic
261. Bril F, Kalavalapalli S, Clark VC, et al. Response             Pioglitazone and vitamin E for nonalcoholic                     steatohepatitis-related cirrhosis: a randomised,
to pioglitazone in patients with nonalcoholic                       steatohepatitis: a cost utility analysis. Hepatology            placebo-controlled phase 2 trial. Lancet Gas-
steatohepatitis with vs without type 2 diabetes. Clin               2012;56:2172–2179                                               troenterol Hepatol 2023;8:511–522
Gastroenterol Hepatol 2018;16:558–566.e552                          275. Kovacs CS, Seshiah V, Swallow R, et al.; EMPA-            288. Aminian A, Al-Kurd A, Wilson R, et al.
262. Newsome PN, Buchholtz K, Cusi K, et al.;                       REG PIO Trial Investigators. Empagliflozin improves             Association of bariatric surgery with major adverse
NN9931-4296 Investigators. A placebo-controlled                     glycaemic and weight control as add-on therapy to               liver and cardiovascular outcomes in patients with

---

# Comprehensive Medical Evaluation and Assessment of Comorbidities

biopsy-proven nonalcoholic steatohepatitis. JAMA 2021;326:2031–2042

1. Fakhry TK, Mhaskar R, Schwitalla T, Muradova E, Gonzalvo JP, Murr MM. Bariatric surgery improves nonalcoholic fatty liver disease: a contemporary systematic review and meta-analysis. Surg Obes Relat Dis 2019;15:502–511
2. Ramai D, Singh J, Lester J, et al. Systematic review with meta-analysis: bariatric surgery reduces the incidence of hepatocellular carcinoma. Aliment Pharmacol Ther 2021;53:977–984
3. Kim RG, Loomba R, Prokop LJ, Singh S. Statin use and risk of cirrhosis and related complications in patients with chronic liver diseases: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol 2017;15:1521–1530.e1528
4. Kaplan DE, Serper MA, Mehta R, et al.; VOCAL Study Group. Effects of hypercholesterolemia and statin exposure on survival in a large national cohort of patients with cirrhosis. Gastroenterology 2019;156:1693–1706.e1612
5. Li C, Ford ES, Zhao G, Croft JB, Balluz LS, Mokdad AH. Prevalence of self-reported clinically diagnosed sleep apnea according to obesity status in men and women: National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey, 2005-2006. Prev Med 2010;51:18–23
6. West SD, Nicoll DJ, Stradling JR. Prevalence of obstructive sleep apnoea in men with type 2 diabetes. Thorax 2006;61:945–950
7. Resnick HE, Redline S, Shahar E, et al.; Sleep Heart Health Study. Diabetes and sleep disturbances: findings from the Sleep Heart Health Study. Diabetes Care 2003;26:702–709
8. Foster GD, Sanders MH, Millman R, et al.; Sleep AHEAD Research Group. Obstructive sleep apnea among obese patients with type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Care 2009;32:1017–1019
9. Bibbins-Domingo K, Grossman DC, Curry SJ, et al.; US Preventive Services Task Force. Screening for obstructive sleep apnea in adults: US Preventive Services Task Force recommendation statement. JAMA 2017;317:407–414
10. Malhotra A, Grunstein RR, Fietze I, et al.; SURMOUNT-OSA Investigators. Tirzepatide for the treatment of obstructive sleep apnea and obesity. N Engl J Med 2024;391:1193–1205
11. Piciucchi M, Capurso G, Archibugi L, Delle Fave MM, Capasso M, Delle Fave G. Exocrine pancreatic insufficiency in diabetic patients: prevalence, mechanisms, and treatment. Int J Endocrinol 2015;2015:595649
12. Lee Y-K, Huang M-Y, Hsu C-Y, Su Y-C. Bidirectional relationship between diabetes and acute pancreatitis: a population-based cohort study in Taiwan. Medicine (Baltimore) 2016;95:e2448

Downloaded from diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/48/Supplement_1/S59/791510/dc25s004.pdf by guest on 16 December 2024

---

