# 7. Diabetes Technology

S146

Diabetes Care Volume 48, Supplement 1, January 2025

# Diabetes Technology: Standards

American Diabetes Association Professional Practice Committee*

of Care in Diabetes—2025

Diabetes Care 2025;48(Suppl. 1):S146–S166 | https://doi.org/10.2337/dc25-S007

Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/48/Supplement_1/S146/791474/dc25s007.pdf by guest on 16 December 2024

The American Diabetes Association (ADA) “Standards of Care in Diabetes” includes the ADA’s current clinical practice recommendations and is intended to provide the components of diabetes care, general treatment goals and guidelines, and tools to evaluate quality of care. Members of the ADA Professional Practice Committee, an interprofessional expert committee, are responsible for updating the Standards of Care annually, or more frequently as warranted. For a detailed description of ADA standards, statements, and reports, as well as the evidence-grading system for ADA’s clinical practice recommendations and a full list of Professional Practice Committee members, please refer to Introduction and Methodology. Readers who wish to comment on the Standards of Care are invited to do so at professional.diabetes.org/SOC.

Diabetes technology is the term used to describe the hardware, devices, and software that people with diabetes use to assist with self-management, ranging from lifestyle modifications to glucose monitoring and therapy adjustments. Historically, diabetes technology has been divided into two main categories: insulin administered by syringe, pen, patch devices, or pump (also called continuous subcutaneous insulin infusion) and glucose as assessed by blood glucose monitoring (BGM) or continuous glucose monitoring (CGM). Diabetes technology now includes automated insulin delivery (AID) systems that use CGM-informed algorithms to modulate insulin delivery. It also encompasses connected insulin pens and diabetes self-management support software that serve as medical devices. Diabetes technology, coupled with education, follow-up, pharmacotherapy if needed, and support, can improve the lives and health of people with diabetes; however, the complexity and rapid evolution of the diabetes technology landscape can also be a barrier to implementation for people with diabetes, their care partners, and the health care team.

# GENERAL DEVICE PRINCIPLES

# Recommendations

7.1 Diabetes devices should be offered to people with diabetes. A

7.2 Initiation of continuous glucose monitoring (CGM) should be offered to people with type 1 diabetes early in the disease, even at time of diagnosis. A

7.3 The type(s) and selection of devices should be individualized based on a person’s specific needs, circumstances, preferences, and skill level. In the setting of an individual whose diabetes is partially or wholly managed by someone else (e.g., a young child or a person with cognitive impairment or dexterity, psychosocial issues, and/or physical limitations), the caregiver’s skills and preferences are integral to the decision-making process. E

7.4 When prescribing a device, ensure that people with diabetes and caregivers receive initial and ongoing education and training, either in person or remotely, and ongoing evaluation of technique, results, and the ability to utilize data, including uploading or sharing data (if applicable), to monitor and adjust therapy. C

*A complete list of members of the American Diabetes Association Professional Practice Committee can be found at https://doi.org/10.2337/dc25-SINT. Duality of interest information for each author is available at https://doi.org/10.2337/dc25-SDIS.

Suggested citation: American Diabetes Association Professional Practice Committee. 7. Diabetes technology: Standards of Care in Diabetes—2025. Diabetes Care 2025;48(Suppl. 1):S146–S166

© 2024 by the American Diabetes Association. Readers may use this article as long as the work is properly cited, the use is educational and not for profit, and the work is not altered. More information is available at https://www.diabetesjournals.org/journals/pages/license.

---

# Diabetes Technology

# 7.5

Health care professionals working with diabetes technology should ensure that competencies are established within the health care team based on their specific roles and within specific settings. E

# 7.6

People with diabetes who have been using CGM, continuous subcutaneous insulin infusion (CSII), and/or automated insulin delivery (AID) for diabetes management should have continued access across third-party payors, regardless of age or A1C levels. E

However, better outcomes cannot be achieved without the training and education of health care professionals. The assessment of competencies in diabetes technology is crucial for prescribers, certified diabetes and education specialists, pharmacists, nurses, and anyone involved in the care of people with diabetes. These competencies are described as basic, fundamental, intermediate, and advanced and are specific to the role of each health care team member (11).

# 7.7

Students should be supported at school in the use of diabetes technology, such as CGM systems, CSII, connected insulin pens, and AID systems, as recommended or prescribed by their health care team. E

# 7.8

Recommend early initiation, including at diagnosis, of CGM, CSII, and AID depending on a person’s or caregiver’s needs and preferences. C

# 7.9

Standardized reports for all CGM, CSII, AID, and connected insulin devices with a minimum of a single-page report, such as the ambulatory glucose profile and weekly summary, should be available and utilized. Options for daily and weekly reports and raw data should be available. E

Technology is rapidly changing, but there is no one-size-fits-all approach to technology use in people with diabetes. Insurance coverage can lag behind device availability, people’s interest in devices and willingness for adoption can vary, and health care teams may have challenges in keeping up with newly released technology. An American Diabetes Association resource, which can be accessed at diabetes.org/living-with-diabetes/treatment-care/diabetes-technology-guide, can help health care professionals and people with diabetes make decisions on the initial choice of device(s). Other sources, including health care professionals and device manufacturers, can help people troubleshoot when difficulties arise (1–10).

# BLOOD GLUCOSE MONITORING

# Recommendations

# 7.10

People with diabetes should be provided with blood glucose monitoring (BGM) devices as indicated by their circumstances, preferences, and treatment. People using CGM devices must also have access to BGM at all times.

# 7.11

People who are taking insulin and using BGM should be encouraged to check their blood glucose levels when appropriate based on their insulin therapy. This may include checking when fasting, prior to meals and snacks, after meals, at bedtime, in the middle of the night, prior to, during, and after exercise, when hypoglycemia is suspected, after treating low blood glucose levels until they are normoglycemic, when hyperglycemia is suspected, and prior to and while performing critical tasks such as driving. B

# 7.12

Health care professionals should be aware of the differences in accuracy among blood glucose meters. Only meters approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) (or comparable regulatory agencies for other geographical locations) with proven accuracy should be used, with unexpired test strips purchased from a pharmacy or licensed distributor and properly stored. E

# 7.13

Although BGM in people on noninsulin therapies has not consistently shown clinically significant reductions in A1C levels, it may be helpful when modifying meal plans, physical activity plans, and/or medications (particularly medications that can cause hypoglycemia) in conjunction with a treatment adjustment program. E

# 7.14

Consider potential interference of medications and substances on glucose.

---

S148   Diabetes Technology                                                                                      Diabetes Care     Volume 48, Supplement 1, January 2025

levels measured by blood glucose me-
ters. B

Major clinical trials of insulin-treated people
with diabetes have included BGM as part of
multifactorial interventions to demon-
strate the benefit of intensive glycemic
management on diabetes complications
(16). BGM is thus an integral component
of effective therapy for individuals using
insulin. In recent years, CGM has emerged
as a method for the assessment of glucose
levels (discussed below). Glucose monitor-
ing allows people with diabetes to evalu-
ate their individual responses to therapy
and assess whether glycemic goals are be-
ing safely achieved. Integrating results into
diabetes management can be a useful tool
for guiding medical nutrition therapy and
physical activity, preventing hypoglycemia,
or adjusting medications (particularly pran-
dial insulin doses or correction bolus doses).
The specific needs and goals of the person
with diabetes should dictate BGM fre-
quency and timing or the consideration of
CGM use. As recommended by the device
manufacturers and the U.S. Food and Drug
Administration (FDA), people with diabe-
tes using CGM must have access to BGM
for multiple reasons, including whenever
there is suspicion that the CGM is inaccu-
rate, while waiting for warm-up, when
there is a disruption in CGM transmission,
for calibration (if needed) or if a warning
message appears, when CGM supplies
are delayed, and in any clinical setting
where glucose levels are changing rapidly
(>2 mg/dL/min), which could cause a dis-
crepancy between CGM and blood glu-
cose values.

Meter Standards
Glucose meters meeting FDA guidance
for meter accuracy provide the most

reliable data for diabetes management.
There are several current standards for
the accuracy of blood glucose meters,
but the two most used are those of the
International Organization for Standardi-
zation (ISO) (ISO 15197:2013) and the
FDA. The current ISO and FDA standards
are compared in Table 7.1. In Europe,
currently marketed meters must meet
current ISO standards. In the U.S., cur-
rently marketed meters must meet the
standard under which they were ap-
proved, which may not be the current
standard. Moreover, the monitoring of
current accuracy postmarketing is left to the
manufacturer and not routinely checked by
an independent source.

People with diabetes assume their glu-
cose meter is accurate because it is FDA
cleared, but that may not be the case.
There is substantial variation in the accu-
racy of widely used BGM systems (17,18).
The Diabetes Technology Society Blood
Glucose Monitoring System Surveillance
Program provides information on the
performance of devices used for BGM
(diabetestechnology.org/surveillance/). In one
analysis, 6 of the top 18 best-selling glucose
meters met the accuracy standard (19). In a
subsequent analysis with updated glucose
meters, 14 of 18 glucose meters met the
minimum accuracy requirements (20). There
are single-meter studies in which benefits
have been found with individual meter sys-
tems, but few studies have compared me-
ters head-to-head. Certain meter system
characteristics, such as the use of lancing de-
vices that are less painful (21) and the ability
to reapply blood to a strip with an insuffi-
cient initial sample, or meters with inte-
grated speech that can read aloud glucose
levels for visually impaired individuals (22),
may also be beneficial to people with dia-
betes (23) and may make BGM less burden-
some to perform.

Counterfeit Strips
People with diabetes should be advised
against purchasing or reselling preowned
or secondhand test strips, as these may
give incorrect results. Only unopened and
unexpired vials of glucose test strips should
be used to ensure BGM accuracy.

Optimizing Blood Glucose
Monitoring Device Use
Optimal use of BGM devices requires
proper review and interpretation of data
by both the person with diabetes and the
health care professional to ensure that
data are used in an effective and timely
manner. In people with type 1 diabetes,
there is a correlation between greater
BGM frequency and lower A1C levels
(24). Among those who check their blood
glucose at least once daily, many report
taking no action when results are high
or low (25). Some meters now provide
advice to the user in real time when
monitoring glucose levels (26), whereas
others can be used as a part of integrated
health platforms (27). People with diabe-
tes should be taught how to use BGM
data to adjust food intake, physical activ-
ity, or pharmacologic therapy to achieve
specific goals. The ongoing need for and
frequency of BGM should be reevaluated
at each routine visit to ensure its effec-
tive use (24,28).

People With Diabetes on Intensive Insulin
Therapies
BGM is especially important for people with
diabetes treated with insulin to monitor for
and prevent hypoglycemia and hyperglyce-
mia. Most individuals on intensive insulin
therapies (multiple daily injections [MDI] or
insulin pump therapy) should be encour-
aged to assess glucose levels using BGM
(and/or CGM) prior to meals and snacks, at
bedtime, occasionally postprandially, prior

Table 7.1—Comparison of ISO 15197:2013 and FDA blood glucose meter accuracy standards

| Setting | FDA* | ISO 15197:2013* |
|---------|------|-----------------|
| Hospital use | 95% within 12% for BG ≥75 mg/dL<br>95% within 12 mg/dL for BG <75 mg/dL<br>98% within 15% for BG ≥75 mg/dL<br>98% within 15 mg/dL for BG <75 mg/dL | 95% within 15% for BG ≥100 mg/dL<br>95% within 15 mg/dL for BG <100 mg/dL<br>99% in A or B region of consensus error grid‡ |
| Home use | 95% within 15% for all BG in the usable BG range†<br>99% within 20% for all BG in the usable BG range† | |

BG, blood glucose; FDA, U.S. Food and Drug Administration; ISO, International Organization for Standardization. To convert mg/dL to mmol/L,
see endmemo.com/medical/unitconvert/Glucose.php. *Data shown in the FDA column are from the FDA (298). Data shown in the ISO column
are from the FDA (299). †The range of blood glucose values for which the meter has been proven accurate and will provide readings (other
than low, high, or error). ‡Values outside of the "clinically acceptable" A and B regions are considered "outlier" readings and may be danger-
ous to use for therapeutic decisions (300).

---

# Diabetes Technology

to, during, and after physical activity, when statistically significant change in A1C levels at 1 year (31). Meta-analyses have suggested that BGM can reduce A1C levels by 0.25–0.3% at 6 months (33–35), but the effect was attenuated at 12 months in one analysis (33). Reductions in A1C levels were greater ( 0.3%) in trials where structured BGM data were used to adjust medications, but A1C levels were not changed significantly without such structured diabetes therapy adjustment (35). A key consideration is that performing BGM alone does not lower blood glucose levels. To be useful, the information must be integrated into clinical and self-management treatment plans.

# Continuous Glucose Monitoring Devices

People With Diabetes Using Basal Insulin and/or Oral Agents and Noninsulin Injectables

The evidence is insufficient regarding when to prescribe BGM and how often monitoring is needed for insulin-treated people with diabetes who do not use intensive insulin therapy, such as those with type 2 diabetes taking basal insulin with or without oral agents and/or non-insulin injectables. However, for those taking basal insulin, assessing fasting glucose with BGM to inform dose adjustments to achieve blood glucose goals results in lower A1C levels (30).

In people with type 2 diabetes not taking insulin, routine glucose monitoring may be of limited additional clinical benefit. By itself, even when combined with education, this practice has shown limited improvement in outcomes (31). However, for some individuals, glucose monitoring can provide insight into the impact of nutrition, physical activity, and medication management on glucose levels. Glucose monitoring may also be useful in assessing hypoglycemia, glucose levels during intercurrent illness, or discrepancies between measured A1C and glucose levels when there is concern an A1C result may not be reliable in specific individuals (for more details, see Section 2, “Diagnosis and Classification of Diabetes”). It may be useful when coupled with a treatment adjustment program. In a year-long study of insulin-naive people with diabetes with suboptimal initial glycemic outcomes, a group trained in structured BGM (a paper tool was used at least quarterly to collect and interpret seven-point BGM profiles taken on three consecutive days) reduced their A1C levels by 0.3% more than the control group (32).

# Glucose Meter Inaccuracy

Although many meters function well under various circumstances, health care professionals and people with diabetes must be aware of factors that impair meter accuracy. A meter reading that seems discordant with the clinical picture needs to be retested or tested in a laboratory. Health care professionals in intensive care unit settings need to be particularly aware of the potential for incorrect meter readings during critical illness, and laboratory-based values should be used if there is any doubt. Some meters give error messages if meter readings are likely to be false (36).

# Recommendations

7.15 Recommend real-time CGM (rtCGM) A or intermittently scanned CGM (isCGM) for diabetes management to youth C and adults B with diabetes on any type of insulin therapy. The choice of CGM device should be made based on the individual’s circumstances, preferences, and needs.

7.16 Consider using rtCGM and isCGM in adults with type 2 diabetes treated with glucose-lowering medications other than insulin to achieve and maintain individualized glycemic goals. The choice of device should be made based on the individual’s circumstances, preferences, and needs. B

7.17 In people with diabetes on insulin therapy, rtCGM devices should be used as close to daily as possible for maximal benefit. A isCGM devices should be scanned frequently, at minimum once every 8 h, to avoid gaps in data. A People with diabetes should have uninterrupted access to their supplies to minimize gaps in CGM. A

7.18 CGM can help achieve glycemic goals (e.g., time in range and time above range) A and A1C goal B in type 1 diabetes and pregnancy and may be beneficial for other types of diabetes in pregnancy. E

7.19 In circumstances when consistent use of CGM is not feasible, consider periodic use of personal or professional CGM to adjust medication and/or lifestyle. C

7.20 Skin reactions, either due to irritation or allergy, should be assessed and addressed to aid in successful use of devices. E

7.21 People who wear CGM devices should be educated on potential interfering substances and other factors that may affect accuracy. C

---

S150     Diabetes Technology                                                                                         Diabetes Care      Volume 48, Supplement 1, January 2025

Table 7.2—Common interfering substances and/or conditions that affect glucose meters (for inpatient and outpatient use)

| Substance or condition | Effects on glucose values measured by blood glucose meters |
|------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------|
| Maltose*               | Falsely higher blood glucose values                         |
| Galactose              | Falsely higher blood glucose values                         |
| Xylose                 | Falsely higher blood glucose values                         |
| N-Acetylcysteine†      | Falsely higher blood glucose values                         |
| Acetaminophen          | Falsely higher blood glucose values at low blood glucose levels |
| Dopamine               | Falsely higher blood glucose values at low blood glucose levels |
| Furosemide             | Falsely lower blood glucose values                          |
| Vitamin C              | Falsely lower or higher blood glucose values                |
| Uric acid              | Falsely higher blood glucose values at very low or very high glucose levels |
| Hematocrit (high)      | Falsely higher blood glucose values                         |
| Hematocrit (low)       | Falsely lower blood glucose values                          |

*Unmodified glucose dehydrogenase method only. †Glucose dehydrogenase monitors using pyrroloquinoline quinone cofactor (GDH/PQQ).

CGM measures interstitial glucose (which correlates well with plasma glucose, although at times, it can lag if glucose levels are rising or falling rapidly). There are two basic types of CGM devices. The first type includes those that are owned by the user, unblinded, and intended for frequent or continuous use, including real-time CGM (rtCGM), intermittently scanned CGM (isCGM), and over-the-counter CGM devices. The second type is professional CGM devices that are owned by practices and applied in the clinic, which provide data that are blinded or unblinded for a discrete period of time. The types of sensors currently available are either disposable (rtCGM and isCGM) or implantable (rtCGM). Table 7.3 provides definitions for the types of CGM devices. For people with type 1 diabetes using CGM, frequency of sensor use is an important predictor of A1C lowering for all age-groups (38,39). The frequency of scanning with isCGM devices is also correlated with improved outcomes (40–43).

Few real-time systems require calibration by the user, which varies in frequency depending on the device. CGM systems are generally nonadjunctive, meaning they do not require BGM confirmation for treatment decisions like insulin dosing or treating hypoglycemia, except in certain clinical situations (see BLOOD GLUCOSE MONITORING, above) (44–46).

Most CGM systems are designated as integrated CGM (iCGM), a higher standard set by the FDA for integration with other digitally connected devices. Dexcom G6 rtCGM (no generic form available), Dexcom G7 rtCGM (no generic form available), FreeStyle Libre 2 Plus (no generic form available), FreeStyle Libre 3 Plus (no generic form available), and Eversense E3 (no generic form available) are FDA approved for use with AID systems. Similarly, Dexcom G6 rtCGM, Dexcom G7 rtCGM, FreeStyle Libre 2 isCGM (no generic form available), and Medtronic Simplera rtCGM (no generic form available) are approved for use with connected insulin pens (47). Currently, Dexcom G6 and Dexcom G7 are integrated with four AID systems (t:slim X2 with Control-IQ, Omnipod 5, iLet, and Mobi). Similarly, at this time in the U.S., the FreeStyle Libre 2 Plus is integrated with one AID system (t:slim X2 with Control-IQ) and the FreeStyle Libre 3 Plus with another AID system (iLet). Finally, the Medtronic Guardian 3 rtCGM (no generic form available) and the Medtronic Guardian 4 rtCGM (no generic form available) are FDA approved for use with the 670/770G and 780G AID systems, respectively.

Benefits of Continuous Glucose Monitoring

Data From Randomized Controlled Trials
Multiple randomized controlled trials (RCTs) have been performed using rtCGM devices, and the results have largely been positive in terms of reducing A1C levels and/or episodes of hypoglycemia if participants regularly wore the devices (38–41,48–51). The initial studies were done primarily in adults and youth with type 1 diabetes on insulin pump therapy and/or MDI (38,39,48,49, 52). The primary outcome was met and showed benefit in adults of all ages (38,53,54), including seniors (55–57). Data in children show that rtCGM use in young children with type 1 diabetes reduced hypoglycemia; in addition, behavioral support of parents of young

Table 7.3—Continuous glucose monitoring devices

| Type of CGM | Description |
|-------------|-------------|
| rtCGM | CGM systems that measure and display glucose levels continuously |
| isCGM with and without alarms | CGM systems that measure glucose levels continuously but require scanning for visualization and storage of glucose values |
| Professional CGM | CGM devices that are placed on the person with diabetes in the health care professional's office and worn for a discrete period of time (generally 7–14 days). Data may be blinded or visible to the person wearing the device. The data are used to assess glycemic patterns and trends. Unlike rtCGM and isCGM devices, these devices are clinic-based and not owned by the person with diabetes. |
| Over-the-counter CGM | CGM devices called biosensors, which measure glucose continuously and display the levels at various times, have insights rather than alarms and are indicated for people with prediabetes or with diabetes not on insulin. |

CGM, continuous glucose monitoring; isCGM, intermittently scanned CGM; rtCGM, real-time CGM.

---

# Diabetes Technology

Children with diabetes using rtCGM showed the benefits of reducing hypoglycemia concerns and diabetes distress (38,49,58). Similarly, A1C level reduction was seen in adolescents and young adults with type 1 diabetes using rtCGM (48). RCT data on rtCGM use in individuals with type 2 diabetes on MDI (59), mixed therapies (10, 60), and basal insulin (61,62) have consistently shown reductions in A1C levels and increases in TIR (70–180 mg/dL [3.9–10.0 mmol/L]) but not a reduction in rates of hypoglycemia (63). Although short-term use of rtCGM in youth with type 2 diabetes did not impact short-term glucose changes or A1C improvement, users reported behavioral changes with increased blood glucose measurements, increased insulin administration, and overall improved diabetes management and quality of life (64,65). The improvements in type 2 diabetes have largely occurred without changes in insulin doses or other diabetes medications. CGM discontinuation in individuals with type 2 diabetes on basal insulin caused partial reversal of A1C reduction and TIR improvements, suggesting that continued CGM use achieves the greatest benefits (15).

RCT data for rtCGM benefits in people with type 2 diabetes not using insulin are increasing and generally have shown greater benefits of CGM compared with BGM for A1C, TIR, time below range (TBR), and time above range (TAR) as well as greater user-reported satisfaction (66). These benefits were initially reported in a study where the intermittent use of rtCGM for either one session or two sessions (3 months apart) versus control treatment showed improvement of A1C at 3 months. At 6 months, the two-session rtCGM group achieved significant A1C reduction. For both rtCGM groups, participants who measured BGM at least 1.5 times per day achieved greater A1C improvement compared with the control group (67).

In addition, rtCGM benefits were reported in a mixed population (including people not using insulin) of adults with type 2 diabetes with reduction in A1C levels, increase in TIR, and reduction of time in hyperglycemia (>180 mg/dL [>10 mmol/L] and >250 mg/dL [>13.9 mmol/L]) (10).

# Observational and Real-world Studies

CGM systems are widely available in many countries for people with diabetes, and this allows for the collection of large amounts of data across groups of people with diabetes. Data for isCGM in adults with diabetes include results from observational studies, retrospective studies, and analyses of registry and population data (75,76). In individuals with type 1 diabetes wearing isCGM devices, studies have shown improvement in A1C levels (41,77), TIR (70–180 mg/dL [3.9–10.0 mmol/L]), and hypoglycemia (41,43,75,78,79). Reductions in acute diabetes complications, such as diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA), episodes of severe hypoglycemia or diabetes-related coma, and hospitalizations for hypoglycemia and hyperglycemia, have been observed in adults with type 1 or type 2 diabetes (43,78,80), with persistent effects observed even after 2 years of CGM initiation (81).

RCT data for isCGM are fewer but increasing. One study was performed in adults with type 1 diabetes and met its primary outcome of a reduction in rates of hypoglycemia (68). In adults with type 2 diabetes using insulin, two studies were done: one study did not meet its primary end point of A1C level reduction (69) but achieved a secondary end point of a reduction in hypoglycemia, and the other study met its primary end point of an improvement in the Diabetes Treatment Satisfaction Questionnaire score as well as a secondary end point of A1C level reduction (70).

---

# Diabetes Technology

# Diabetes Care Volume 48, Supplement 1, January 2025

Recent data have emerged from a real-world observational analysis of rtCGM use in adults with type 2 diabetes not treated with insulin. In this study, rtCGM benefits were observed at 6 month and 12 months versus baseline, with reduction of mean glucose levels, reduction of GMI, increase in TIR, increase in time in tight target range (70–140 mg/dL [3.9–7.8 mmol/L]), and reduction in TAR >180 and >250 mg/dL (88). However, data analysis can be burdensome without a systematic approach to its review, and CGM and AID manufacturers should aim to make device data reports as standardized as possible to reduce the burden of data analysis (12). Several efforts have been made to streamline the interpretation of CGM reports to assist health care professionals in their daily practice. These have various, but overall similar, approaches. The initial steps are focused on assessing the sufficiency and quality of data; subsequent recommendations include reviewing the presence and trends or patterns of hypoglycemia, followed by hyperglycemia patterns and trends. Some authors also suggest approaches to changing therapy plans based on the data reviewed that enable health care professionals to make a simple yet comprehensive review and plan of care even within the time constraints of office visits (96–100).

# Real-time Continuous Glucose Monitoring Compared With Intermittently Scanned Continuous Glucose Monitoring

In adults with type 1 diabetes, three RCTs have been conducted comparing isCGM (without predictive alerts/alarms) and rtCGM (with predictive alerts/alarms) (84,89,90). In two of the studies, the primary outcome was a reduction in time spent in hypoglycemia, and rtCGM showed greater benefits compared with isCGM (89,90). In the other study, the primary outcome was improved TIR, and rtCGM also showed greater benefits compared with isCGM (84). A retrospective analysis also showed improvement in TIR with rtCGM compared with isCGM (91). A more recent 12-month real-world nonrandomized study compared rtCGM with isCGM in adults with type 1 diabetes. At 12 months, A1C levels, time in level 1 hypoglycemia (<70 mg/dL [<3.9 mmol/L]), and time in level 2 hypoglycemia (<54 mg/dL [<3.0 mmol/L]) were all lower in the rtCGM group than in the isCGM group; similarly, the TIR was higher in the rtCGM group than in the isCGM group (92).

# Data Analysis

The abundance of data provided by CGM offers opportunities to analyze data for people with diabetes more granularly than previously possible, providing additional information to aid in achieving glycemic goals. A variety of metrics have been proposed (93) and are discussed in Section 6, “Glycemic Goals and Hypoglycemia.” CGM is essential for creating an ambulatory glucose profile (AGP) and providing data on TIR, percentage of time spent above and below range, and glycemic variability (94). Standardized reports for CGM, AID, and connected insulin pens include multiple reports, each providing different degrees of information. These reports, whether single page or with raw data, should be used in clinical practice to identify CGM trends and patterns; in the setting of AID systems, these reports provide valuable insights.

# Real-time Continuous Glucose Monitoring Device Use in Pregnancy

CGM indication is now expanded to include pregnancy for Dexcom G7, FreeStyle Libre 2, and FreeStyle Libre 3, which will enhance care in this population (101,102). Prior data from one well-designed RCT showed a reduction in A1C levels in pregnant adults with type 1 diabetes on MDI or insulin pump therapy and using rtCGM in addition to standard care; CGM users experienced more pregnancy-specific TIR (63–140 mg/dL [3.5–7.8 mmol/L]) and less time in hyperglycemia (103). This study demonstrated the value of rtCGM in pregnancy complicated by type 1 diabetes by showing a mild improvement in A1C levels and a significant improvement in the maternal glucose TIR for pregnancy (63–140 mg/dL [3.5–7.8 mmol/L]), without an increase in hypoglycemia, as well as reductions in large-for-gestational-age births, infant hospital length of stay, and severe neonatal hypoglycemia (103).

# Use of Professional Continuous Glucose Monitoring and Intermittent Use of Continuous Glucose Monitoring

Professional CGM devices, which provide retrospective data, either blinded or unblinded, for analysis can be used to identify patterns of hypoglycemia and hyperglycemia (111,112). Professional CGM can be helpful to evaluate an individual’s glucose levels when either rtCGM or isCGM is not available to the individual or they prefer a blinded analysis or a shorter experience with unblinded data. It can be particularly useful in individuals using agents that can cause hypoglycemia, as the data can be used to evaluate periods of hypoglycemia and make medication dose adjustments if needed. It can also be useful to evaluate periods of hyperglycemia.

---

diabetesjournals.org/care                                                                                                            Diabetes Technology         S153

Some data have shown the benefit of intermittent use of CGM (rtCGM or isCGM) in individuals with type 2 diabetes on noninsulin and/or basal insulin therapies (60,73). In these RCTs, people with type 2 diabetes not on intensive insulin therapy used CGM intermittently compared with those randomized to BGM. Both early (60) and late improvements in A1C levels were found (60,73).

Furthermore, in a real-world study, the use of professional CGM in individuals with type 2 diabetes not on insulin at baseline and at 6 months of follow-up resulted in lower A1C at 6 months as well as a shift toward greater use of glucose-lowering medications with cardiometabolic benefits, such as sodium–glucose transporter 2 inhibitors and glucagon-like peptide 1 receptor agonists (113). Use of professional or intermittent CGM should always be coupled with analysis and interpretation for people with diabetes along with education, as needed, to adjust medication and change lifestyle behaviors (114–116).

Side Effects of Continuous Glucose Monitoring Devices
Contact dermatitis (both irritant and allergic) has been reported with all devices that attach to the skin (20,117,118). In some cases, this has been linked to the presence of isobornyl acrylate, a skin sensitizer that can cause an additional spreading allergic reaction (119–121). It is important to ask CGM users periodically about adhesive reactions, as tape formulations may change over time. Patch testing can sometimes identify the cause of contact dermatitis (122). Identifying and eliminating tape allergens is important to ensure the comfortable use of devices and promote self-care

(123–126). The PANTHER Program offers resources in English and Spanish at www.pantherprogram.org/skin-solutions. In some instances, using an implanted sensor can help avoid skin reactions in those sensitive to tape (127,128).

Substances and Factors Affecting Continuous Glucose Monitoring Accuracy
Sensor interference due to several medications/substances is a known potential source of CGM sensor measurement errors (Table 7.4). While several of these substances have been reported in the various CGM brands' user manuals, additional interferences have been discovered after the market release of these products. Hydroxyurea, used for myeloproliferative disorders and hematologic conditions, is one of the most recently identified interfering substances that cause a temporary increase in sensor glucose values discrepant from actual glucose values (129–134). Similarly, substances such as mannitol and sorbitol, when administered intravenously or as a component of peritoneal dialysis solution, may increase blood mannitol or sorbitol concentrations and cause falsely elevated readings of sensor glucose (135). Therefore, it is crucial to routinely review the medications and supplements used by the person with diabetes to identify possible interfering substances and advise them accordingly on the need to use additional BGM if sensor values are unreliable due to these substances.

INSULIN DELIVERY
Insulin Syringes and Pens

Recommendations
7.22 For people with insulin-requiring diabetes on multiple daily injections

(MDI), insulin pens are preferred in most cases. Still, insulin syringes may be used for insulin delivery considering individual and caregiver preference, insulin type, availability in vials, dosing therapy, cost, and self-management capabilities. C
7.23 Insulin pens or insulin injection aids are recommended for people with dexterity issues or vision impairment or when decided by shared decision-making to facilitate the accurate dosing and administration of insulin. C
7.24 Offer connected insulin pens for people with diabetes taking multiple daily insulin injections. B
7.25 FDA-approved insulin dose calculators/decision support systems may be helpful for calculating insulin doses. B

Injecting insulin with a syringe or pen (136–147) is the insulin delivery method used by most people with diabetes (142,148), although inhaled insulin is also available. Others use insulin pumps or AID devices (see INSULIN PUMPS AND AUTOMATED INSULIN DELIVERY SYSTEMS, below). For people with diabetes who use insulin, insulin syringes and pens both can deliver insulin safely and effectively for the achievement of glycemic goals. Individual preferences, cost, insulin type, dosing therapy, and self-management capabilities should be considered when choosing among delivery systems. Trials with insulin pens generally show equivalence or small improvements in glycemic outcomes compared with using a vial and syringe. Many individuals with diabetes prefer using a pen because of its simplicity and convenience. It is important to note that while many insulin types are available for purchase as either pens or vials, others may be

Table 7.4—Continuous glucose monitoring device interfering substances

| Medication | Systems affected | Effect |
|------------|------------------|--------|
| Acetaminophen |
| >4 g/day | Dexcom G6, Dexcom G7 | Higher sensor readings than actual glucose |
| Any dose | Medtronic Guardian | Higher sensor readings than actual glucose |
| Ascorbic acid (vitamin C), >500 mg/day | FreeStyle Libre 14 day, FreeStyle Libre 2, FreeStyle Libre 3 | Higher sensor readings than actual glucose |
| Ascorbic acid (vitamin C), >1,000 mg/day | FreeStyle Libre 2 Plus, FreeStyle Libre 3 Plus | Higher sensor readings than actual glucose |
| Hydroxyurea | Dexcom G6, Dexcom G7, Medtronic Guardian | Higher sensor readings than actual glucose |
| Mannitol (intravenously or as peritoneal dialysis solution) | Senseonics Eversense | Higher sensor readings than actual glucose |
| Sorbitol (intravenously or as peritoneal dialysis solution) | Senseonics Eversense | Higher sensor readings than actual glucose |

---

# Diabetes Technology

# Diabetes Care Volume 48, Supplement 1, January 2025

available in only one form or the other, and risk of intramuscular injection with erratic absorption and possibly the development of lipohypertrophy. When reused, needles may be duller and thus injections may be more painful. Proper insulin injection technique is a requisite for receiving the full dose of insulin with each injection. Concerns with technique and use of the proper technique are outlined in Section 9, “Pharmacologic Approaches to Glycemic Treatment.”

Inhaled technosphere insulin can be useful for people with diabetes, providing an alternative method of insulin delivery with very fast onset of action. In a recent randomized clinical trial, the use of technosphere inhaled insulin showed lower postprandial hyperglycemia than subcutaneous rapid-acting analog insulin.

The most common syringe sizes are 1 mL, 0.5 mL, and 0.3 mL, allowing doses of up to 100 units, 50 units, and 30 units, respectively, of U-100 insulin. Some 0.3-mL syringes have half-unit markings, whereas other syringes have markings in 1- to 2-unit increments. In a few parts of the world, insulin syringes still have U-80 and U-40 markings for older insulin concentrations and veterinary insulin, and U-500 syringes are available for the use of U-500 insulin. Syringes are generally used once but may be reused by the same individual in resource-limited settings with appropriate storage and cleansing.

Insulin pens offer added convenience by combining the vial and syringe into a single device. Insulin pens, allowing push-button injections, come as disposable pens with prefilled cartridges or reusable insulin pens with replaceable insulin cartridges. Pens vary with respect to dosing increment and minimal dose, ranging from half-unit doses to 2-unit dose increments, with the latter available in U-200 insulin pens. U-500 pens come in 5-unit dose increments. Some reusable pens include a memory function, which can recall dose amounts and timing. Insulin pens, once started, can be kept in use for variable durations, based on the type of insulin, usually for 28 days, ranging from 14 to 56 days. Needle thickness (gauge) and length are other considerations. Needle gauges range from 22 to 34, with a higher gauge indicating a thinner needle. A thicker needle can give a dose of insulin more quickly, while a thinner needle may cause less pain. Needle length ranges from 4 to 12.7 mm, with some evidence suggesting that shorter needles (4–5 mm) lower the risk of pain.

# Insulin Pumps and Automated Insulin Delivery Systems

# Recommendations

7.26 AID systems should be the preferred insulin delivery method to improve glycemic outcomes and reduce hypoglycemia and disparities in youth and adults with type 1 diabetes and other types of insulin-deficient diabetes who are capable of using the device (either by themselves or with a caregiver). Choice of an AID system should be made based on the individual’s circumstances, preferences, and needs.

7.27 Insulin pump therapy, preferably with CGM, should be offered for diabetes management to youth and adults on MDI with type 2 diabetes who can use the device safely (either by themselves or with a caregiver). The choice of device should be made based on the individual’s circumstances, preferences, and needs.

7.28 Individuals with diabetes who have been using CSII should have continued access across third-party payors.

Insulin pumps have been available in the U.S. for over 40 years. These devices deliver rapid-acting insulin throughout the day to help manage glucose levels. Most insulin pumps use tubing to deliver insulin through a cannula, while a few attach directly to the skin without tubing (pods or patch pumps), and these systems have been approved for use in type 1 and type 2 diabetes. AID systems, which can adjust insulin delivery rates based on sensor glucose values, are preferred over nonautomated pumps and MDI in people with type 1 diabetes and have largely replaced the use of nonintegrated or standard insulin pumps. Recently, one AID system was approved for use by people with type 2 diabetes.

Historically, studies that compared MDI with insulin pump therapy were relatively small and of short duration. However, a systematic review and meta-analysis concluded that pump therapy has modest advantages for lowering A1C levels and for reducing severe hypoglycemia rates in children and adults.

Real-world data on insulin.

---

# Diabetes Technology

Access to insulin pump therapy, including AID systems, should be allowed or continued in older adults as it is in younger people. Based on shared decision-making by people with diabetes and health care professionals, insulin pumps may be considered in all children and adolescents with type 1 diabetes.

Complications of the pump can be caused by issues with infusion sets (dislodgement and occlusion), which put individuals at risk for ketosis and DKA and thus must be recognized and managed early. Other pump skin issues include lipohypertrophy or, less frequently, lipoatrophy and pump site infection.

Common barriers to pump therapy adoption in children and adolescents are concerns regarding the physical interference of the device, discomfort with the idea of having a device on the body, therapeutic effectiveness, and financial burden.

# Sensor-Augmented Pumps

SAPs (or partial closed-loop systems) consist of three components: an insulin pump, a CGM system, and an algorithm that automates insulin suspension when glucose is low or is predicted to go low. Predictive low-glucose suspend systems have been shown to reduce time spent with glucose <70 mg/dL without rebound hyperglycemia during a 6-week randomized crossover trial.

Similar results were seen in additional studies in adults and children with reduction of hypoglycemia. SAPs have now been largely replaced by AID systems, which offer superior benefits for glycemic outcomes; nevertheless, some AID systems can still be used in either low-glucose suspend mode or predictive low-glucose suspend mode.

# Automated Insulin Delivery Systems

AID systems consist of mainly three components: an insulin pump, a CGM system, and an algorithm that determines insulin delivery. Based on the model and brand of currently FDA approved AID systems, the algorithm can be hosted in the pump body, in an insulin pod, or on a phone app. All AID systems on the market today integrate with one or more CGM systems and adjust insulin delivery either by modulating the preprogrammed basal rates or by replacing the basal rates with microboluses or microdoses of insulin every 5 min.

The modulation of insulin delivery is done by increasing, decreasing, or pausing insulin based on the CGM feedback, the predicted direction of the glucose levels, and the speed with which the glucose levels change.

---

# Diabetes Technology

# Diabetes Care Volume 48, Supplement 1, January 2025

glucose levels are changing. Different AID systems modulate insulin based on predicted glucose levels at various times, most commonly 30 min or 1 h. Currently available AID systems have either fixed glucose targets or adjustable glucose targets, generally ranging from 100 to 120 mg/dL, with some exceptions where glucose targets can be adjusted up to 150 mg/dL. Glucose targets are generally set up for 24 h but can also be adjusted in some systems with up to eight segments per day. All current AID systems provide automated correction doses, whether embedded in the microdose adjustments every 5 min or by providing additional correction boluses whose doses are dependent on the various types of algorithms with variable frequency and threshold glucose based on the type of control algorithm. Most AID systems can be used in manual mode, although this is generally not recommended, as the benefits of CGM modulation may be partially or totally lost. However, use of AID in manual mode may be necessary in some circumstances, therefore it is important to review and reassess manual-mode settings periodically.

Current AID systems still require manual entry of carbohydrates for meal announcements or qualitative meal estimation announcements to calculate prandial doses. Adjustments for physical activity are available in most AID systems currently on the market. These can be programmed in various time increments. In general, the glucose target is raised to prespecified levels based on AID systems, and these are often accompanied by more conservative insulin delivery to reduce the risk of hypoglycemia in the setting of increased insulin sensitivity other than physical activity, such as prolonged fasting or NPO status for procedures. Of note, some systems may still give autocorrection boluses if the glucose levels rise above a certain threshold even while the exercise/activity mode has been enabled.

Data from real-world studies on AID systems have become available and continue to increase rapidly. These studies include large numbers of users, at times even 30-fold higher than the number of people studied in AID pivotal trials. It is important to emphasize that for some AID systems all data are automatically collected to the database, whereas for other systems data are collected based on voluntary sharing to the database by AID users. A recent systematic review of AID real-world studies, with 20 studies representing 171,209 individuals, substantiated the results observed in the pivotal trials and have confirmed the clinical benefits of AID systems in people with type 1 diabetes. Newer systems have shown increased time spent in automation, and the real-world studies have retrospectively analyzed longer duration of system use compared with their respective pivotal trials, with most analyses occurring for more than 6 months and an average duration of 9 months.

# Automated Insulin Delivery Systems in Pregnancy

The use of AID systems in diabetes and pregnancy presents particular challenges, as the current FDA-approved AID systems (except for one that has been FDA approved but is not yet commercially available) have glucose goals that are not pregnancy specific and do not have algorithms designed to achieve pregnancy-specific glucose goals. Initiating or continuing AID systems during pregnancy needs to be assessed carefully. Selected individuals with type 1 diabetes should be evaluated as potential candidates for AID systems in the setting of expert guidance. Recent data have shown the clinical benefits and safety of AID use, even though only one study used an AID system with a pregnancy-specific glycemic target. This study, a multicenter, controlled trial, enrolled pregnant women with type 1 diabetes before 14 weeks’ gestation and randomized them by week 16 to the AID system or standard care (MDI with CGM or standard insulin pump therapy with CGM). The primary outcome of time spent in the pregnancy-specific target range of 63–140 mg/dL was found to be 10.5% higher in the AID group versus standard care (P < 0.001). The secondary outcomes were also met, with less time spent above range (>140 mg/dL) in the AID group, greater overnight time in target range, and lower A1C. There were no differences in the number of preterm births, birth weight, neonatal complications, or admission to the neonatal intensive care unit.

Additional data were reported from a pilot RCT of SAP without automation versus assisted hybrid closed-loop therapy in pregnant women with type 1 diabetes that enrolled participants in the first trimester and randomized them at 14–18 weeks.

---

# Diabetes Technology

gestation. This system did not have pregnancy-specific glucose targets; however, the results showed that the time in hypoglycemia <54 mg/dL did not differ between groups. Time at <63 mg/dL was lower in the hybrid closed-loop group, whereas percentage of the pregnancy-specific TIR was greater in the SAP group in the third trimester, with similar safety and adverse pregnancy outcomes between groups. There were no statistically significant differences in measures of glycemic risk or in measures of glycemic variability between the hybrid closed-loop and the SAP groups at any point during pregnancy or postpartum. In another study with an AID system with a lowest glucose target of 100 mg/dL, participants were randomized to AID or standard of care in the first trimester and for the rest of gestation. The 24-h percentage of pregnancy-specific TIR was not different between groups, but the overnight percentage of pregnancy-specific TIR was higher in the AID group while using assistive techniques. Time spent below range was lower over 24 h and overnight in the AID group as well. Quality-of-life metrics were improved in the AID group in this study.

Therefore, if the decision is made to use AID systems without pregnancy-specific targets in selected pregnant individuals, then using assistive techniques, such as the combination of SAP mode (or manual mode) and hybrid closed-loop mode at different time points in pregnancy or throughout the day or entering fake carbohydrate boluses, should be considered and applied as needed to achieve intended goals. See Section 15, “Diabetes and Pregnancy,” for more details.

# Open-Source Automated Insulin Dosing Recommendation

7.29 Support and provide diabetes management advice to people with diabetes who choose to use an open-source closed-loop system.

Open-source automated insulin dosing (OS-AID) algorithms provide the precise code that governs their operation, so health care professionals and people with diabetes can have a more complete understanding of risks and benefits. Any commercial entity could provide the source code for their interoperable automated glycemic controller, but most choose not to. OS-AID algorithms are largely designed, maintained, and curated by people with diabetes and their loved ones. Thousands of people with diabetes use these algorithms with cleared CGM systems and insulin pump components. The information on how to set up and manage these systems is freely available online.

OS-AID is the preferred term when referring to any open-source system (commercial or otherwise). It is important to note that the term “DIY” is not reflective of any aspect of these community-driven systems. No individual person has written all the code for these algorithms, and a large percentage of users do not build the software themselves. There are two main available algorithms, the OpenAPS algorithm and the Loop algorithm, which have been implemented on a variety of platforms.

# Insulin Pumps and Automated Insulin Delivery Systems in People With Type 2 and Other Types of Diabetes

Traditional insulin pumps can be considered for the treatment of people with type 2 diabetes who are on MDI as well as those who have other types of diabetes resulting in insulin deficiency, for instance, those who have had a pancreatectomy and/or individuals with cystic fibrosis. Similar to data on insulin pump use in people with type 1 diabetes, reductions in A1C levels have been reported in some studies. More recently, real-world reports have shown reduction of A1C levels and reduction of total daily insulin dose in individuals with type 2 diabetes initiating insulin pump therapy. Use of insulin pumps in insulin-requiring people should be considered an option in those who are capable of safely using the device.

# Alternative Insulin Delivery Options

Alternative insulin delivery options in people with type 2 diabetes include disposable patch-like devices, which provide either a continuous subcutaneous insulin infusion of rapid-acting insulin (basal) with bolus insulin in 2-unit increments at the press of a button or bolus insulin only, delivered in 2-unit increments, used in conjunction with basal insulin injections. In a single-center study of adolescents with type 1 diabetes randomized to AndroidAPS with quantitative carbohydrate announcements, qualitative announcements, and no announcements, TIR was preserved across groups.

# Loop Algorithm

Loop, an open-source model predictive control algorithm, is implemented on iPhones as an app. Prospective real-world data from 558 adults and children with type 1 diabetes on this system was used to support the FDA clearance of a variant called Tidepool Loop.

---

# Diabetes Technology

# Diabetes Care Volume 48, Supplement 1, January 2025

Both the Loop and OpenAPS algorithms offer direct management of algorithm aggressiveness through conventional pump settings. Therefore, it is advisable that health care professionals understand and offer support in tuning settings for these safe and effective technologies. This may include, for example, the adjustment of basal rates, insulin-to-carbohydrate ratios, or insulin sensitivity factors. As with any AID system, a backup insulin treatment plan is advisable.

# Digital Health Technology

# Recommendation

7.30 Consider combining technology (CGM, insulin pump, and/or diabetes apps) with online or virtual coaching to improve glycemic outcomes in individuals with diabetes or prediabetes.

Increasingly, people are turning to the internet for advice, coaching, connection, and health care. Diabetes, partly because it is both common and numeric, lends itself to the development of apps and online programs. Recommendations for developing and implementing a digital diabetes clinic have been published. The FDA approves and monitors clinically validated, digital, and usually online health technologies intended to treat a medical or psychological condition; these are known as digital therapeutics, or “digiceuticals.” Other applications, such as those that assist in displaying or storing data, encourage a healthy lifestyle or provide limited clinical data support. Therefore, it is possible to find apps that have been fully reviewed and approved by the FDA and others designed and promoted by people with relatively little skill or knowledge in the clinical treatment of diabetes. There are insufficient data to provide recommendations for specific apps for diabetes management, education, and support in the absence of RCTs and validation of apps unless they are FDA cleared.

An area of particular importance is that of online privacy and security. Established cloud-based data aggregator programs, such as Tidepool, Glooko, and others, have been developed with appropriate data security features and are compliant with the U.S. Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996. These programs can help monitor people with diabetes and provide access to their health care teams. Consumers should read the policy regarding data privacy and sharing before entering data into an application and learn how they can manage the way their data will be used.

# Inpatient Care

# Recommendations

7.31 In people with diabetes wearing personal CGM, the use of CGM should be continued when clinically appropriate during hospitalization, with confirmatory point-of-care glucose measurements for insulin dosing and hypoglycemia assessment and treatment under an institutional protocol.

7.32 Continue use of insulin pump or AID in people with diabetes who are hospitalized when clinically appropriate.

With the advent of the coronavirus disease 2019 pandemic, the FDA exercised enforcement discretion by allowing CGM device use temporarily in the hospital for patient monitoring. This approach has been taken to reduce the use of personal protective equipment and more closely monitor patients so that health care personnel do not have to go into a patient room solely to measure a glucose level. Studies have been published assessing the effectiveness of this approach, which may ultimately lead to the approved use of CGM.

---

# Diabetes Technology

for monitoring hospitalized individuals relates to improved glycemic control in children.

19. Klonoff DC, Parkes JL, Kovatchev BP, et al. Investigation of the accuracy of 18 marketed blood glucose monitors. Diabetes Care 2018;41:1681–1688

5. Prahalad P, Ding VY, Zaharieva DP, et al. Teamwork, targets, technology, and tight control in newly diagnosed type 1 diabetes: the Pilot 4T Study. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2022;107:998–1008

20. Pleus S, Ulbrich S, Zschornack E, Kamann S, Haug C, Freckmann G. Documentation of skin-related issues associated with continuous glucose monitoring use in the scientific literature. Diabetes Technol Ther 2019;21:538–545

21. Grady M, Lamps G, Shemain A, Cameron H, Murray L. Clinical evaluation of a new, lower pain, one touch lancing device for people with diabetes: virtually pain-free testing and improved comfort compared to current lancing systems. J Diabetes Sci Technol 2021;15:53–59

22. Burton DM, Enigk MG, Lilly JW. Blood glucose meters and accessibility to blind and visually impaired people. J Diabetes Sci Technol 2012;6:242–245

23. Harrison B, Brown D. Accuracy of a blood glucose monitoring system that recognizes insufficient sample blood volume and allows application of more blood to the same test strip. Expert Rev Med Devices 2020;17:75–82

24. Miller KM, Beck RW, Bergenstal RM, et al.; T1D Exchange Clinic Network. Evidence of a strong association between frequency of self-monitoring of blood glucose and hemoglobin A1c levels in T1D exchange clinic registry participants.

25. Grant RW, Huang ES, Wexler DJ, et al. Patients who self-monitor blood glucose and their unused testing results. Am J Manag Care 2015;21:e119–e129

26. Katz LB, Stewart L, Guthrie B, Cameron H. Patient satisfaction with a new, high accuracy blood glucose meter that provides personalized guidance, insight, and encouragement. J Diabetes Sci Technol 2020;14:318–323

27. Shaw RJ, Yang Q, Barnes A, et al. Self-monitoring diabetes with multiple mobile health devices. J Am Med Inform Assoc 2020;27:667–676

28. Gellad WF, Zhao X, Thorpe CT, Mor MK, Good CB, Fine MJ. Dual use of Department of Veterans Affairs and Medicare benefits and use of test strips in veterans with type 2 diabetes mellitus. JAMA Intern Med 2015;175:26–34

29. Ziegler R, Heidtmann B, Hilgard D, Hofer S, Rosenbauer J, Holl R, DPV-Wiss-Initiative. Frequency of SMBG correlates with HbA1c and acute complications in children and adolescents with type 1 diabetes. Pediatr Diabetes 2011;12:11–17

30. Garber AJ. Treat-to-target trials: uses, interpretation and review of concepts. Diabetes Obes Metab 2014;16:193–205

31. Young LA, Buse JB, Weaver MA, et al.; Monitor Trial Group. Glucose self-monitoring in non-insulin-treated patients with type 2 diabetes in primary care settings: a randomized trial. JAMA Intern Med 2017;177:920–929

32. Polonsky WH, Fisher L, Schikman CH, et al. Structured self-monitoring of blood glucose significantly reduces A1C levels in poorly controlled, noninsulin-treated type 2 diabetes: results from the Structured Testing Program study. Diabetes Care 2011;34:262–267

33. Malanda UL, Welschen LMC, Riphagen II, Dekker JM, Nijpels G, Bot SDM. Self-monitoring of blood glucose in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus who are not using insulin. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2012;1:Cd005060

34. Willett LR; ACP Journal Club. Meta-analysis: self-monitoring in non-insulin-treated type 2.

---

# Diabetes Technology

# Diabetes Care Volume 48, Supplement 1, January 2025

diabetes improved HbA1c by 0.25%. Ann Intern Med 2012;156:JC6–12

1. Mannucci E, Antenore A, Giorgino F, Scavini M. Effects of structured versus unstructured self-monitoring of blood glucose on glucose control in patients with non-insulin-treated type 2 diabetes: a meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. J Diabetes Sci Technol 2018;12:183–189
2. Sai S, Urata M, Ogawa I. Evaluation of linearity and interference effect on SMBG and POCT devices, showing drastic high values, low values, or error messages. J Diabetes Sci Technol 2019;13:734–743
3. Sacks DB, Arnold M, Bakris GL, et al. Guidelines and recommendations for laboratory analysis in the diagnosis and management of diabetes mellitus. Diabetes Care 2023;46:e151–e199
4. Tamborlane WV, Beck RW, Bode BW, et al.; Juvenile Diabetes Research Foundation Continuous Glucose Monitoring Study Group. Continuous glucose monitoring and intensive treatment of type 1 diabetes. N Engl J Med 2008;359:1464–1476
5. Tumminia A, Crimi S, Sciacca L, et al. Efficacy of real-time continuous glucose monitoring on glycaemic control and glucose variability in type 1 diabetic patients treated with either insulin pumps or multiple insulin injection therapy: a randomized controlled crossover trial. Diabetes Metab Res Rev 2015;31:61–68
6. Hansen KW, Bibby BM. The frequency of intermittently scanned glucose and diurnal variation of glycemic metrics. J Diabetes Sci Technol 2022;16:1461–1465
7. Urakami T, Yoshida K, Kuwabara R, et al. Frequent scanning using flash glucose monitoring contributes to better glycemic control in children and adolescents with type 1 diabetes. J Diabetes Investig 2022;13:185–190
8. Lameijer A, Lommerde N, Dunn TC, et al. Flash glucose monitoring in the Netherlands: increased monitoring frequency is associated with improvement of glycemic parameters. Diabetes Res Clin Pract 2021;177:108897
9. Hohendorff J, Gumprecht J, Mysliwiec M, Zozulinska-Ziolkiewicz D, Malecki MT. Intermittently scanned continuous glucose monitoring data of polish patients from real-life conditions: more scanning and better glycemic control compared to worldwide data. Diabetes Technol Ther 2021;23:577–585
10. Aleppo G, Ruedy KJ, Riddlesworth TD, et al.; REPLACE-BG Study Group. REPLACE-BG: a randomized trial comparing continuous glucose monitoring with and without routine blood glucose monitoring in adults with well-controlled type 1 diabetes. Diabetes Care 2017;40:538–545
11. Friedman JG, Cardona Matos Z, Szmuilowicz ED, Aleppo G. Use of continuous glucose monitors to manage type 1 diabetes mellitus: progress, challenges, and recommendations. Pharmgenomics Pers Med 2023;16:263–276
12. Klonoff DC, Gabbay M, Moon SJ, Wilmot EG. Importance of FDA-integrated continuous glucose monitors to ensure accuracy of continuous glucose monitoring. J Diabetes Sci Technol 2024:19322 968241250357
13. Medtronic. Medtronic announces FDA approval of Simplera CGM and global partnership with Abbott. Accessed 16 August 2024. Available from https://news.medtronic.com/2024-08-07-Medtronic-announces-FDA-approval-of-Simplera-TM-CGM-and-global-partnership-with-Abbott
14. Martens T, Beck RW, Bailey R, et al.; MOBILE Study Group. Effect of continuous glucose monitoring on glycemic control in patients with type 2 diabetes treated with basal insulin: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA 2021;325:2262–2272
15. Deshmukh H, Wilmot EG, Gregory R, et al. Effect of flash glucose monitoring on glycemic control, hypoglycemia, diabetes-related distress, and resource utilization in the Association of

---

# Diabetes Technology

# British Clinical Diabetologists (ABCD) nationwide

Technol Ther. 21 June 2024 [Epub ahead of print]. DOI: 10.1089/dia.2024.0197

# References

1. Kristensen K, Ogge LE, Sengpiel V, et al. Continuous glucose monitoring in pregnant women with type 1 diabetes: an observational cohort study of 186 pregnancies. Diabetologia 2019;62:1143–1153
2. Charleer S, Gillard P, Vandoorne E, Cammaerts K, Mathieu C, Casteels K. Intermittently scanned continuous glucose monitoring is associated with high satisfaction but increased HbA1c and weight in well-controlled youth with type 1 diabetes. Pediatr Diabetes 2020;21:1465–1474
3. Tyndall V, Stimson RH, Zammitt NN, et al. Marked improvement in HbA1c following commencement of flash glucose monitoring in people with type 1 diabetes. Diabetologia 2019;62:1349–1356
4. Nathanson D, Svensson A-M, Miftaraj M, et al. Effect of flash glucose monitoring in adults with type 1 diabetes: a nationwide, longitudinal observational study of 14,372 flash users compared with 7691 glucose sensor naive controls. Diabetologia 2021;64:1595–1603
5. Charleer S, De Block C, Van Huffel L, et al. Quality of life and glucose control after 1 year of nationwide reimbursement of intermittently scanned continuous glucose monitoring in adults living with type 1 diabetes (FUTURE): a prospective observational real-world cohort study. Diabetes Care 2020;43:389–397
6. Roussel R, Riveline J-P, Vicaut E, et al. Important drop in rate of acute diabetes complications in people with type 1 or type 2 diabetes after initiation of flash glucose monitoring in France: the RELIEF study. Diabetes Care 2021;44:1368–1376
7. Riveline J-P, Roussel R, Vicaut E, et al. Reduced rate of acute diabetes events with flash glucose monitoring is sustained for 2 years after initiation: extended outcomes from the RELIEF study. Diabetes Technol Ther 2022;24:611–618
8. Miller E, Kerr MSD, Roberts GJ, Nabutovsky Y, Wright E. Flash CGM associated with event reduction in nonintensive diabetes therapy. Am J Manag Care 2021;27:e372–e377
9. Al Hayek A, Al Dawish M, El Jammal M. The impact of flash glucose monitoring on markers of glycaemic control and patient satisfaction in type 2 diabetes. Cureus 2021;13:e16007
10. Visser MM, Charleer S, Fieuws S, et al. Comparing real-time and intermittently scanned continuous glucose monitoring in adults with type 1 diabetes (ALERTT1): a 6-month, prospective, multicentre, randomised controlled trial. Lancet 2021;397:2275–2283
11. Wright EE, Kerr MSD, Reyes IJ, Nabutovsky Y, Miller E. Use of flash continuous glucose monitoring is associated with A1C reduction in people with type 2 diabetes treated with basal insulin or noninsulin therapy. Diabetes Spectr 2021;34:184–189
12. Al Hayek AA, Al Dawish MA. Use of flash glucose monitoring and glycemic control in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus not treated with an intensive insulin regimen: 1-year real-life retrospective cohort study. Adv Ther 2023;40:2855–2868
13. Karter AJ, Parker MM, Moffet HH, Gilliam LK, Dlott R. Association of real-time continuous glucose monitoring with glycemic control and acute metabolic events among patients with insulin-treated diabetes. JAMA 2021;325:2273–2284
14. Layne JE, Jepson LH, Carite AM, Parkin CG, Bergenstal RM. Long-term improvements in glycemic control with Dexcom CGM use in adults with noninsulin-treated type 2 diabetes. Diabetes 2021;390:2347–2359
15. Dexcom, Inc. Dexcom G7 Continuous Glucose Monitoring System. Integrated Continuous Glucose Monitoring System, Factory Calibrated. Accessed 14 August 2024. Available from https://fda.report/PMN/K213919
16. Feig DS, Donovan LE, Corcoy R, et al.; CONCEPTT Collaborative Group. Continuous glucose monitoring in pregnant women with type 1 diabetes (CONCEPTT): a multicentre international randomised controlled trial. Lancet 2017;390:2347–2359

---

S162      Diabetes Technology                                                                                                    Diabetes Care        Volume 48, Supplement 1, January 2025

diabetes mellitus. J Diabetes Sci Technol 2021;15:
786–791
119. Kamann S, Aerts O, Heinemann L. Further
evidence of severe allergic contact dermatitis from
isobornyl acrylate while using a continuous glucose
monitoring system. J Diabetes Sci Technol 2018;12:
630–633
120. Aerts O, Herman A, Bruze M, Goossens A,
Mowitz M. FreeStyle Libre: contact irritation
versus contact allergy. Lancet 2017;390:1644
121. Herman A, Aerts O, Baeck M, et al. Allergic
contact dermatitis caused by isobornyl acrylate in
Freestyle Libre, a newly introduced glucose sensor.
Contact Dermatitis 2017;77:367–373
122. Hyry HSI, Liippo JP, Virtanen HM. Allergic
contact dermatitis caused by glucose sensors in
type 1 diabetes patients. Contact Dermatitis 2019;81:
161–166
123. Asarani NAM, Reynolds AN, Boucher SE, de
Bock M, Wheeler BJ. Cutaneous complications
with continuous or flash glucose monitoring use:
systematic review of trials and observational
studies. J Diabetes Sci Technol 2020;14:328–337
124. Lombardo F, Salzano G, Crisafulli G, et al.
Allergic contact dermatitis in pediatric patients
with type 1 diabetes: an emerging issue. Diabetes
Res Clin Pract 2020;162:108089
125. Oppel E, Kamann S, Heinemann L, Reichl F-
X, Högg C. The implanted glucose monitoring
system Eversense: an alternative for diabetes
patients with isobornyl acrylate allergy. Contact
Dermatitis 2020;82:101–104
126. Freckmann G, Buck S, Waldenmaier D, et al.
Skin reaction report form: development and design
of a standardized report form for skin reactions due
to medical devices for diabetes management. J
Diabetes Sci Technol 2021;15:801–806
127. Deiss D, Irace C, Carlson G, Tweden KS,
Kaufman FR. Real-world safety of an implantable
continuous glucose sensor over multiple cycles of
use: a post-market registry study. Diabetes Technol
Ther 2020;22:48–52
128. Sanchez P, Ghosh-Dastidar S, Tweden KS,
Kaufman FR. Real-world data from the first U.S.
commercial users of an implantable continuous
glucose sensor. Diabetes Technol Ther 2019;21:
677–681
129. Heinemann L. Interferences with CGM
systems: practical relevance? J Diabetes Sci Technol
2022;16:271–274
130. Tellez SE, Hornung LN, Courter JD, et al.
Inaccurate glucose sensor values after hydroxyurea
administration. Diabetes Technol Ther 2021;23:
443–451
131. Szmuilowicz ED, Aleppo G. Interferent effect
of hydroxyurea on continuous glucose monitoring.
Diabetes Care 2021;44:e89–e90
132. Pfützner A, Jensch H, Cardinal C, Srikantha-
moorthy G, Riehn E, Thomé N. Laboratory protocol
and pilot results for dynamic interference testing of
continuous glucose monitoring sensors. J Diabetes
Sci Technol 2022;18:59–65
133. Lorenz C, Sandoval W, Mortellaro M.
Interference assessment of various endogenous
and exogenous substances on the performance of
the Eversense long-term implantable continuous
glucose monitoring system. Diabetes Technol Ther
2018;20:344–352
134. Denham D. Effect of repeated doses of
acetaminophen on a continuous glucose monitoring
system with permselective membrane. J Diabetes
Sci Technol 2021;15:517–518

135. U.S. FDA. Summary of safety and effectiveness
data (SSED). Continuous glucose monitor (CGM),
implanted, adjunctive use 2018. Accessed 14 August
2024. Available from https://www.accessdata.fda
.gov/cdrh_docs/pdf16/P160048B.pdf
136. Piras de Oliveira C, Mitchell BD, Fan L, et al.
Patient perspectives on the use of half-unit
insulin pens by people with type 1 diabetes: a
cross-sectional observational study. Curr Med
Res Opin 2021;37:45–51
137. Machry RV, Cipriani GF, Pedroso HU, et al.
Pens versus syringes to deliver insulin among
elderly patients with type 2 diabetes: a randomized
controlled clinical trial. Diabetol Metab Syndr 2021;
13:64
138. Korytkowski M, Bell D, Jacobsen C,
Suwannasari R; FlexPen Study Team. A multicenter,
randomized, open-label, comparative, two-period
crossover trial of preference, efficacy, and safety
profiles of a prefilled, disposable pen and
conventional vial/syringe for insulin injection in
patients with type 1 or 2 diabetes mellitus. Clin
Ther 2003;25:2836–2848
139. Asche CV, Shane-McWhorter L, Raparla S.
Health economics and compliance of vials/syringes
versus pen devices: a review of the evidence.
Diabetes Technol Ther 2010;12(Suppl 1):S101–S108
140. Singh R, Samuel C, Jacob JJ. A comparison
of insulin pen devices and disposable plastic
syringes–simplicity, safety, convenience and cost
differences. Eur Endocrinol 2018;14:47–51
141. Frid AH, Kreugel G, Grassi G, et al. New
insulin delivery recommendations. Mayo Clin
Proc 2016;91:1231–1255
142. Lasalvia P, Barahona-Correa JE, Romero-
Alvernia DM, et al. Pen devices for insulin self-
administration compared with needle and vial:
systematic review of the literature and meta-
analysis. J Diabetes Sci Technol 2016;10:959–966
143. Slabaugh SL, Bouchard JR, Li Y, Baltz JC,
Meah YA, Moretz DC. Characteristics relating to
adherence and persistence to basal insulin
regimens among elderly insulin-naïve patients
with type 2 diabetes: pre-filled pens versus vials/
syringes. Adv Ther 2015;32:1206–1221
144. Chandran A, Bonafede MK, Nigam S,
Saltiel-Berzin R, Hirsch LJ, Lahue BJ. Adherence to
insulin pen therapy is associated with reduction
in healthcare costs among patients with type 2
diabetes mellitus. Am Health Drug Benefits 2015;
8:148–158
145. Ahmann A, Szeinbach SL, Gill J, Traylor L,
Garg SK. Comparing patient preferences and
healthcare provider recommendations with the
pen versus vial-and-syringe insulin delivery in
patients with type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Technol
Ther 2014;16:76–83
146. Asche CV, Luo W, Aagren M. Differences in
rates of hypoglycemia and health care costs in
patients treated with insulin aspart in pens versus
vials. Curr Med Res Opin 2013;29:1287–1296
147. Luijf YM, DeVries JH. Dosing accuracy of
insulin pens versus conventional syringes and vials.
Diabetes Technol Ther 2010;12(Suppl 1):S73–S77
148. Hanas R, de Beaufort C, Hoey H, Anderson
B. Insulin delivery by injection in children and
adolescents with diabetes. Pediatr Diabetes 2011;
12:518–526
149. Pfützner A, Schipper C, Niemeyer M, et al.
Comparison of patient preference for two insulin
injection pen devices in relation to patient dexterity
skills. J Diabetes Sci Technol 2012;6:910–916

150. Reinauer KM, Joksch G, Renn W, Eggstein
M. Insulin pens in elderly diabetic patients.
Diabetes Care 1990;13:1136–1137
151. Thomas DR, Fischer RG, Nicholas WC, Beghe
C, Hatten KW, Thomas JN. Disposable insulin
syringe reuse and aseptic practices in diabetic
patients. J Gen Intern Med 1989;4:97–100
152. Hirsch IB, Beck RW, Marak MC, et al.;
INHALE-3 Study Group. A randomized comparison
of postprandial glucose excursion using inhaled
insulin versus rapid-acting analog insulin in adults
with type 1 diabetes using multiple daily injections
of insulin or automated insulin delivery. Diabetes
Care 2024;47:1682–1687
153. Seo J, Heidenreich S, Aldalooj E, et al. Patients'
preferences for connected insulin pens: a discrete
choice experiment among patients with type 1 and
type 2 diabetes. Patient 2023;16:127–138
154. Gomez-Peralta F, Abreu C, Fernández-
Rubio E, et al. Efficacy of a connected insulin pen
cap in people with noncontrolled type 1
diabetes: a multicenter randomized clinical trial.
Diabetes Care 2023;46:206–208
155. Cranston I, Jamdade V, Liao B, Newson RS.
Clinical, economic, and patient-reported benefits
of connected insulin pen systems: a systematic
literature review. Adv Ther 2023;40:2015–2037
156. Danne TPA, Joubert M, Hartvig NV, Kaas A,
Knudsen NN, Mader JK. Association between
treatment adherence and continuous glucose
monitoring outcomes in people with diabetes
using smart insulin pens in a real-world setting.
Diabetes Care 2024;47:995–1003
157. Bailey TS, Stone JY. A novel pen-based
Bluetooth-enabled insulin delivery system with
insulin dose tracking and advice. Expert Opin
Drug Deliv 2017;14:697–703
158. Eiland L, McLarney M, Thangavelu T, Drincic
A. App-based insulin calculators: current and
future state. Curr Diab Rep 2018;18:123
159. Breton MD, Patek SD, Lv D, et al. Continuous
glucose monitoring and insulin informed advisory
system with automated titration and dosing of
insulin reduces glucose variability in type 1
diabetes mellitus. Diabetes Technol Ther 2018;20:
531–540
160. Bergenstal RM, Johnson M, Passi R, et al.
Automated insulin dosing guidance to optimise
insulin management in patients with type 2
diabetes: a multicentre, randomised controlled
trial. Lancet 2019;393:1138–1148
161. Schneider JE, Parikh A, Stojanovic I. Impact
of a novel insulin management service on non-
insulin pharmaceutical expenses. J Health Econ
Outcomes Res 2018;6:53–62
162. Huckvale K, Adomaviciute S, Prieto JT, Leow
MK-S, Car J. Smartphone apps for calculating
insulin dose: a systematic assessment. BMC Med
2015;13:106
163. Yeh H-C, Brown TT, Maruthur N, et al.
Comparative effectiveness and safety of methods
of insulin delivery and glucose monitoring for
diabetes mellitus: a systematic review and meta-
analysis. Ann Intern Med 2012;157:336–347
164. Aleppo G, DeSalvo DJ, Lauand F, et al.
Improvements in glycemic outcomes in 4738
children, adolescents, and adults with type 1
diabetes initiating a tubeless insulin management
system. Diabetes Ther 2023;14:593–610
165. Lin MH, Connor CG, Ruedy KJ, et al.; Pediatric
Diabetes Consortium. Race, socioeconomic status,
and treatment center are associated with insulin

---

# Diabetes Technology

S163

Pump therapy in youth in the first year following multiple daily injections using insulin glargine.

191. Wood MA, Shulman DI, Forlenza GP, et al. In-clinic evaluation of the MiniMed 670G system “suspend before low” feature in children with type 1 diabetes. Diabetes Technol Ther 2018;20:731–737

166. Willi SM, Miller KM, DiMeglio LA, et al.; T1D Exchange Clinic Network. Racial-ethnic disparities in management and outcomes among children with type 1 diabetes. Pediatrics 2015;135:424–434

167. Redondo MJ, Libman I, Cheng P, et al.; Pediatric Diabetes Consortium. Racial/ethnic minority youth with recent-onset type 1 diabetes have poor prognostic factors. Diabetes Care 2018;41:1017–1024

168. Berghaeuser MA, Kapellen T, Heidtmann B, Haberland H, Klinkert C, Holl RW, German Working Group for Insulin Pump Treatment in Paediatric Patients. Continuous subcutaneous insulin infusion in toddlers starting at diagnosis of type 1 diabetes mellitus. A multicenter analysis of 104 patients from 63 centres in Germany and Austria. Pediatr Diabetes 2008;9:590–595

169. Peters AL, Ahmann AJ, Battelino T, et al. Diabetes technology-continuous subcutaneous insulin infusion therapy and continuous glucose monitoring in adults: an Endocrine Society clinical practice guideline. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2016;101:3922–3937

170. Gill M, Chhabra H, Shah M, Zhu C, Grunberger G. C-peptide and beta-cell autoantibody testing prior to initiating continuous subcutaneous insulin infusion pump therapy did not improve utilization or medical costs among older adults with diabetes mellitus. Endocr Pract 2018;24:634–645

171. Vigersky RA, Huang S, Cordero TL, et al.; OpT2mise Study Group. Improved HBa1c, total daily insulin dose, and treatment satisfaction with insulin pump therapy compared to multiple daily insulin injections in patients with type 2 diabetes irrespective of baseline c-peptide levels. Endocr Pract 2018;24:446–452

172. Wheeler BJ, Heels K, Donaghue KC, Reith DM, Ambler GR. Insulin pump-associated adverse events in children and adolescents–a prospective study. Diabetes Technol Ther 2014;16:558–562

173. Ucieklak D, Mrozinska S, Wojnarska A, Malecki MT, Klupa T, Matejko B. Insulin-induced lipohypertrophy in patients with type 1 diabetes mellitus treated with an insulin pump. Int J Endocrinol 2022;2022:9169296

174. Wong JC, Boyle C, DiMeglio LA, et al.; T1D Exchange Clinic Network. Evaluation of pump discontinuation and associated factors in the T1D Exchange Clinic Registry. J Diabetes Sci Technol 2017;11:224–232

175. Wong JC, Dolan LM, Yang TT, Hood KK. Insulin pump use and glycemic control in adolescents with type 1 diabetes: predictors of change in method of insulin delivery across two years. Pediatr Diabetes 2015;16:592–599

176. Plotnick LP, Clark LM, Brancati FL, Erlinger T. Safety and effectiveness of insulin pump therapy in children and adolescents with type 1 diabetes. Diabetes Care 2003;26:1142–1146

177. Redondo MJ, Connor CG, Ruedy KJ, et al.; Pediatric Diabetes Consortium. Pediatric Diabetes Consortium type 1 diabetes new onset (NeOn) study: factors associated with HbA1c levels one year after diagnosis. Pediatr Diabetes 2014;15:294–302

178. Doyle EA, Weinzimer SA, Steffen AT, Ahern JAH, Vincent M, Tamborlane WV. A randomized, prospective trial comparing the efficacy of continuous subcutaneous insulin infusion with multiple daily insulin injections in patients with type 1 diabetes. Diabetes Care 2018;41:2155–2161

179. Alemzadeh R, Ellis JN, Holzum MK, Parton EA, Wyatt DT. Beneficial effects of continuous subcutaneous insulin infusion and flexible multiple daily insulin regimen using insulin glargine in type 1 diabetes. Pediatrics 2004;114:e91–e95

180. Sherr JL, Hermann JM, Campbell F, et al.; T1D Exchange Clinic Network, the DPV Initiative, and the National Paediatric Diabetes Audit and the Royal College of Paediatrics and Child Health Registries. Use of insulin pump therapy in children and adolescents with type 1 diabetes and its impact on metabolic control: comparison of results from three large, transatlantic paediatric registries. Diabetologia 2016;59:87–91

181. Jeitler K, Horvath K, Berghold A, et al. Continuous subcutaneous insulin infusion versus multiple daily insulin injections in patients with diabetes mellitus: systematic review and meta-analysis. Diabetologia 2008;51:941–951

182. Karges B, Schwandt A, Heidtmann B, et al. Association of insulin pump therapy vs insulin injection therapy with severe hypoglycemia, ketoacidosis, and glycemic control among children, adolescents, and young adults with type 1 diabetes. JAMA 2017;318:1358–1366

183. Haynes A, Hermann JM, Miller KM, et al.; T1D Exchange, WACDD and DPV Registries. Severe hypoglycemia rates are not associated with HbA1c: a cross-sectional analysis of 3 contemporary pediatric diabetes registry databases. Pediatr Diabetes 2017;18:643–650

184. Pickup JC, Sutton AJ. Severe hypoglycaemia and glycaemic control in type 1 diabetes: meta-analysis of multiple daily insulin injections compared with continuous subcutaneous insulin infusion. Diabet Med 2008;25:765–774

185. Birkebaek NH, Drivvoll AK, Aakeson K, et al. Incidence of severe hypoglycemia in children with type 1 diabetes in the Nordic countries in the period 2008-2012: association with hemoglobin A1c and treatment modality. BMJ Open Diabetes Res Care 2017;5:e000377

186. Maahs DM, Hermann JM, Holman N, et al.; National Paediatric Diabetes Audit and the Royal College of Paediatrics and Child Health, the DPV Initiative, and the T1D Exchange Clinic Network. Rates of diabetic ketoacidosis: international comparison with 49,859 pediatric patients with type 1 diabetes from England, Wales, the U.S., Austria, and Germany. Diabetes Care 2015;38:1876–1882

187. Opipari-Arrigan L, Fredericks EM, Burkhart N, Dale L, Hodge M, Foster C. Continuous subcutaneous insulin infusion benefits quality of life in preschool-age children with type 1 diabetes mellitus. Pediatr Diabetes 2007;8:377–383

188. Sundberg F, Barnard K, Cato A, et al. ISPAD Guidelines. Managing diabetes in preschool children. Pediatr Diabetes 2017;18:499–517

189. Commissariat PV, Boyle CT, Miller KM, et al. Insulin pump use in young children with type 1 diabetes: sociodemographic factors and parent-reported barriers. Diabetes Technol Ther 2017;19:363–369

190. Forlenza GP, Li Z, Buckingham BA, et al. Predictive low-glucose suspend reduces hypoglycemia in adults, adolescents, and children with type 1 diabetes in an at-home randomized crossover study: results of the PROLOG trial. Diabetes Care 2018;41:2155–2161

191. Brown SA, Beck RW, Raghinaru D, et al.; iDCL Trial Research Group. Glycemic outcomes of use of CLC versus PLGS in type 1 diabetes: a randomized controlled trial. Diabetes Care 2020;43:1822–1828

192. Bergenstal RM, Garg S, Weinzimer SA, et al. Safety of a hybrid closed-loop insulin delivery system in patients with type 1 diabetes. JAMA 2016;316:1407–1408

193. Garg SK, Weinzimer SA, Tamborlane WV, et al. Glucose outcomes with the in-home use of a hybrid closed-loop insulin delivery system in adolescents and adults with type 1 diabetes. Diabetes Technol Ther 2017;19:155–163

194. Tauschmann M, Thabit H, Bally L, et al.; APCam11 Consortium. Closed-loop insulin delivery in suboptimally controlled type 1 diabetes: a multicentre, 12-week randomised trial. Lancet 2018;392:1321–1329

195. Ekhlaspour L, Forlenza GP, Chernavvsky D, et al. Closed loop control in adolescents and children during winter sports: use of the Tandem Control-IQ AP system. Pediatr Diabetes 2019;20:759–768

196. Buckingham BA, Christiansen MP, Forlenza GP, et al. Performance of the Omnipod personalized model predictive control algorithm with meal bolus challenges in adults with type 1 diabetes. Diabetes Technol Ther 2018;20:585–595

197. Renard E, Tubiana-Rufi N, Bonnemaison-Gilbert E, et al. Closed-loop driven by control-to-range algorithm outperforms threshold-low-glucose-suspend insulin delivery on glucose control albeit not on nocturnal hypoglycaemia in prepubertal patients with type 1 diabetes in a supervised hotel setting. Diabetes Obes Metab 2019;21:183–187

198. Forlenza GP, Ekhlaspour L, Breton M, et al. Successful at-home use of the Tandem Control-IQ artificial pancreas system in young children during a randomized controlled trial. Diabetes Technol Ther 2019;21:159–169

199. Anderson SM, Buckingham BA, Breton MD, et al. Hybrid closed-loop control is safe and effective for people with type 1 diabetes who are at moderate to high risk for hypoglycemia. Diabetes Technol Ther 2019;21:356–363

200. Forlenza GP, Pinhas-Hamiel O, Liljenquist DR, et al. Safety evaluation of the MiniMed 670G system in children 7-13 years of age with type 1 diabetes. Diabetes Technol Ther 2019;21:11–19

201. Karageorgiou V, Papaioannou TG, Bellos I, et al. Effectiveness of artificial pancreas in the non-adult population: a systematic review and network meta-analysis. Metabolism 2019;90:20–30

202. Wadwa RP, Reed ZW, Buckingham BA, et al.; PEDAP Trial Study Group. Trial of hybrid closed-loop control in young children with type 1 diabetes. N Engl J Med 2023;388:991–1001

203. McVean J, Forlenza GP, Beck RW, et al.; CLVer Study Group. Effect of tight glycemic control on pancreatic beta cell function in newly diagnosed.

---

# Diabetes Technology

# Diabetes Care Volume 48, Supplement 1, January 2025

# References

1. Weissberg-Benchell J, Hessler D, Polonsky WH, Fisher L. Psychosocial impact of the bionic pancreas during summer camp. J Diabetes Sci Technol 2016;10:840–844
2. Cordero TL, Dai Z, Arrieta A, et al. Glycemic outcomes during early use of the MiniMed 780G advanced hybrid closed-loop system with Guardian 4 sensor. Diabetes Technol Ther 2023;25:652–658
3. Troncone A, Bonfanti R, Iafusco D, et al. Evaluating the experience of children with type 1 diabetes and their parents taking part in an artificial pancreas clinical trial over multiple days in a diabetes camp setting. Diabetes Care 2016;39:2158–2164
4. Barnard KD, Wysocki T, Allen JM, et al. Closing the loop overnight at home setting: psychosocial impact for adolescents with type 1 diabetes and their parents. BMJ Open Diabetes Res Care 2014;2:e000025
5. Carlson AL, Sherr JL, Shulman DI, et al. Safety and glycemic outcomes during the MiniMed advanced hybrid closed-loop system pivotal trial in adolescents and adults with type 1 diabetes. Diabetes Technol Ther 2022;24:178–189
6. Weissberg-Benchell J, Vesco AT, Shapiro J, et al. Psychosocial impact of the insulin-only iLet bionic pancreas for adults, youth, and caregivers of youth with type 1 diabetes. Diabetes Technol Ther 2023;25:705–717
7. Mathieu C, Ahmed W, Gillard P, et al. The health economics of automated insulin delivery systems and the potential use of time in range in diabetes modeling: a narrative review. Diabetes Technol Ther 2024;26:66–75
8. Considine EG, Sherr JL. Real-world evidence of automated insulin delivery system use. Diabetes Technol Ther 2024;26:53–65
9. Forlenza GP, DeSalvo DJ, Aleppo G, et al. Real-world evidence of Omnipod 5 automated insulin delivery system use in 69,902 people with type 1 diabetes. Diabetes Technol Ther 2024;26:514–525
10. Amigo J, Ortiz-Zuniga A, de Urbina AMO, et al. Switching from treatment with sensor augmented pump to hybrid closed loop system in type 1 diabetes: impact on glycemic control and neuropsychological tests in the real world. Diabetes Res Clin Pract 2023;201:110730
11. Chico A, Navas de Sols S, Lainez M, Rius F, Cuesta M. Efficacy, safety, and satisfaction with the Accu-Chek Insight with Diabeloop closed-loop system in subjects with type 1 diabetes: a multicenter real-world study. Diabetes Technol Ther 2023;25:242–249
12. Benhamou P-Y, Adenis A, Lebbad H, et al. One-year real-world performance of the DBLG1 closed-loop system: data from 3706 adult users with type 1 diabetes in Germany. Diabetes Obes Metab 2023;25:1607–1613
13. Benhamou P-Y, Adenis A, Lablanche S, et al. First generation of a modular interoperable closed-loop system for automated insulin delivery in patients with type 1 diabetes: lessons from trials and real-life data. J Diabetes Sci Technol 2023;17:1433–1439
14. Beck RW, Kanapka LG, Breton MD, et al. A meta-analysis of randomized trial outcomes for the t:slim X2 Insulin pump with Control-IQ technology in youth and adults from age 2 to 72. Diabetes Technol Ther 2023;25:329–342
15. Grassi B, Gomez AM, Calliari LE, et al. Real-world performance of the MiniMed 780G advanced hybrid closed loop system in Latin America: substantial improvement in glycaemic control with each technology iteration of the MiniMed automated insulin delivery system. Diabetes Obes Metab 2023;25:1688–1697

---

# Diabetes Technology

multicenter, open-label randomized, controlled, crossover trial. Diabetes Care 2024;47:1778–1786

1. Reznik Y, Carvalho M, Fendri S, et al. Should people with type 2 diabetes treated by multiple daily insulin injections with home health care support be switched to hybrid closed-loop? The CLOSE AP1 randomized controlled trial. Diabetes Obes Metab 2024;26:622–630
2. Davis GM, Peters AL, Bode BW, et al. Safety and efficacy of the Omnipod 5 automated insulin delivery system in adults with type 2 diabetes: from injections to hybrid closed-loop therapy. Diabetes Care 2023;46:742–750
3. Winter A, Lintner M, Knezevich E. V-Go insulin delivery system versus multiple daily insulin injections for patients with uncontrolled type 2 diabetes mellitus. J Diabetes Sci Technol 2015;9:1111–1116
4. Bergenstal RM, Peyrot M, Dreon DM, et al.; Calibra Study Group. Implementation of basal-bolus therapy in type 2 diabetes: a randomized controlled trial comparing bolus insulin delivery using an insulin patch with an insulin pen. Diabetes Technol Ther 2019;21:273–285
5. Braune K, Lal RA, Petruzelkova L, et al.; OPEN International Healthcare Professional Network and OPEN Legal Advisory Group. Open-source automated insulin delivery: international consensus statement and practical guidance for health-care professionals. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol 2022;10:58–74
6. Lum JW, Bailey RJ, Barnes-Lomen V, et al. A real-world prospective study of the safety and effectiveness of the loop open source automated insulin delivery system. Diabetes Technol Ther 2021;23:367–375
7. Braune K, Gajewska KA, Thieffry A, et al. Why #WeAreNotWaiting–motivations and self-reported outcomes among users of open-source automated insulin delivery systems: multinational survey. J Med Internet Res 2021;23:e25409
8. Burnside MJ, Lewis DM, Crocket HR, et al. Open-source automated insulin delivery in type 1 diabetes. N Engl J Med 2022;387:869–881
9. Petruzelkova L, Neuman V, Plachy L, et al. First use of open-source automated insulin delivery AndroidAPS in full closed-loop scenario: Pancreas4ALL randomized pilot study. Diabetes Technol Ther 2023;25:315–323
10. Braune K, Hussain S, Lal R. The first regulatory clearance of an open-source automated insulin delivery algorithm. J Diabetes Sci Technol 2023;17:1139–1141
11. Phillip M, Bergenstal RM, Close KL, et al. The digital/virtual diabetes clinic: the future is now-recommendations from an international panel on diabetes digital technologies introduction. Diabetes Technol Ther 2021;23:146–154
12. Fleming GA, Petrie JR, Bergenstal RM, Holl RW, Peters AL, Heinemann L. Diabetes digital app technology: benefits, challenges, and recommendations. A consensus report by the European Association for the Study of Diabetes (EASD) and the American Diabetes Association (ADA) Diabetes Technology Working Group. Diabetes Care 2020;43:250–260
13. Wong JC, Izadi Z, Schroeder S, et al. A pilot study of use of a software platform for the collection, integration, and visualization of diabetes device data by health care providers in a multidisciplinary pediatric setting. Diabetes Technol Ther 2018;20:806–816

Downloaded from diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/48/Supplement_1/S146/791474/dc25s007.pdf by guest on 16 December 2024

---

# Diabetes Technology

# Diabetes Care Volume 48, Supplement 1, January 2025

a randomized clinical trial. Diabetes Care 2022;45: 2369–2375

pump technology can be safely used in the inpatient setting. Endocr Pract 2023;29:24–28

U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Blood Glucose Monitoring Test Systems for Prescription Point-of-Care Use: Guidance for Industry and Food and Drug Administration Staff, September 2020. Accessed 15 Aug 2024. Available from https://www.fda.gov/regulatory-information/search-fda-guidance-documents/blood-glucose-monitoring-test-systems-prescription-point-care-use

Singh LG, Satyarengga M, Marcano I, et al. Reducing inpatient hypoglycemia in the general wards using real-time continuous glucose monitoring: the glucose telemetry system, a randomized clinical trial. Diabetes Care 2020;43:2736–2743

Fortmann AL, Spierling Bagsic SR, Talavera L, et al. Glucose as the fifth vital sign: a randomized controlled trial of continuous glucose monitoring in a non-ICU hospital setting. Diabetes Care 2020;43:2873–2877

Pelkey MN, Boyle ME, Long A, Castro JC, Cook CB, Thompson B. Hybrid closed-loop insulin

U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Self-Monitoring Blood Glucose Test Systems for Over-the-Counter Use. Guidance for Industry and Food and Drug Administration Staff, September 2020. Accessed 19 August 2024. Available from https://www.fda.gov/regulatory-information/search-fda-guidance-documents/self-monitoring-blood-glucose-test-systems-over-counter-use

Pardo S, Simmons DA. The quantitative relationship between ISO 15197 accuracy criteria and mean absolute relative difference (MARD) in the evaluation of analytical performance of self-monitoring of blood glucose (SMBG) systems. J Diabetes Sci Technol 2016;10: 1182–1187

Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/48/Supplement_1/S146/791474/dc25s007.pdf by guest on 16 December 2024

---

