

Diabetes Care  Volume 49, Supplement 1, January 2026

# 13. Older Adults: Standards of Care in Diabetes—2026

*American Diabetes Association Professional Practice Committee for Diabetes*

Diabetes Care 2026;49(Suppl. 1):S277–S296 | https://doi.org/10.2337/dc26-S013

The American Diabetes Association (ADA) “Standards of Care in Diabetes” includes the ADA’s current clinical practice recommendations and is intended to provide the components of diabetes care, general treatment goals and guidelines, and tools to evaluate quality of care. Members of the ADA Professional Practice Committee for Diabetes, an interprofessional expert committee, are responsible for updating the Standards of Care annually, or more frequently as warranted. For a detailed description of ADA standards, statements, and reports, as well as the evidence-grading system for ADA’s clinical practice recommendations and a full list of Professional Practice Committee members, please refer to Introduction and Methodology. Readers who wish to comment on the Standards of Care are invited to do so at professional.diabetes.org/SOC.

> **Recommendations**  
> **13.1** Assess the medical, psychological, functional (self-management abilities), and social domains in older adults with diabetes using a comprehensive approach to determine goals and therapeutic approaches for diabetes management. **B**  
> **13.2** Screen at least annually for geriatric syndromes (e.g., cognitive impairment, depression, urinary incontinence, falls, persistent pain, and frailty), hypoglycemia, and polypharmacy in older adults with diabetes, as they may affect diabetes management and diminish quality of life. **B**

Diabetes is a highly prevalent health condition in the aging population. Over 29% of people over the age of 65 years have diabetes (1,2). The number of older adults living with diabetes is expected to increase rapidly in the coming decades as the population ages and the effects of increasing obesity rates manifest in this population (3). Importantly, diabetes in older adults is a highly heterogeneous condition. While type 2 diabetes predominates in the older population (as in the younger population), improvements in insulin delivery, technology, and care over the last few decades have led to increasing numbers of people with childhood and adult-onset type 1 diabetes surviving and thriving into their later decades. Type 1 diabetes is increasingly diagnosed in older adulthood as well, with greater awareness of and attention to appropriate diabetes classification across the life course, with higher incidence in Western countries (4).

Diabetes management in older adults requires regular assessment of medical, psychological, functional, and social domains. When assessing older adults with diabetes, it is important to accurately categorize the type of diabetes, diabetes duration, the presence of complications and comorbidities, the individual’s capacity for self-management and availability of support systems, treatment burden, and treatment-related concerns, such as fear of hypoglycemia, polypharmacy, and financial barriers. Screening for

----

> *A complete list of members of the American Diabetes Association Professional Practice Committee for Diabetes can be found at https://doi.org/10.2337/dc26-SINT.*  
> This section has received endorsement from the American Geriatrics Society.  
> Duality of interest information for each contributor is available at https://doi.org/10.2337/dc26-SDIS.  
> Suggested citation: American Diabetes Association Professional Practice Committee for Diabetes. 13. Older adults: Standards of Care in Diabetes—2026. Diabetes Care 2026;49(Suppl. 1):S277–S296  
> © 2025 by the American Diabetes Association. Readers may use this work for educational, noncommercial purposes if properly cited and unaltered. The version of record may be linked at https://diabetesjournals.org/care, but ADA permission is required to post this work on any third-party site or platform. This publication and its contents may not be reproduced, distributed, or used for text or data mining, machine learning, or similar technologies without prior written permission. Requests to reuse, adapt, or distribute this work may be sent to permissions@diabetes.org. More information is available at https://diabetesjournals.org/journals/pages/license.

2025 December 10 on guest by Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S277/848834/dc26s013.pdf



---



S278  Older  Adults    Diabetes Care Volume  49,  Supplement  1,  January  2026

diabetes complications in older adults should be individualized and periodically revisited, as this may affect treatment goals and therapeutic approaches (5–7). Older adults with diabetes have higher rates of functional disability, accelerated muscle loss, mobility impairment, frailty, and coexisting illnesses, such as hypertension, chronic kidney disease, coronary heart disease, stroke, and premature death than those without diabetes (2,8). They also have higher rates of common geriatric syndromes such as cognitive impairment, depression, urinary incontinence, falls, persistent pain, frailty, and polypharmacy (1). These conditions may affect older adults’ diabetes self-management abilities and quality of life, particularly if unaddressed, and older adults with diabetes often require greater caregiver support than those without diabetes (2,9–11). See section 4, “Comprehensive Medical Evaluation and Assessment of Comorbidities,” for the full range of issues to consider when caring for older adults with diabetes.

The Institute for Healthcare Improvement has developed an evidence-based “4Ms” framework for age-friendly health care that is being adopted by many health systems caring for older adults. The key elements of this approach are Mentation, Medications, Mobility, and What Matters Most, with each element affecting the others (12). The 4Ms framework provides a helpful conceptual model to address person-specific issues that may be interrelated and affect diabetes management in older individuals (**Fig. 13.1**) and offers a framework to establish individualized treatment goals and approaches (13–15), including delivery of diabetes self-management education (particularly when complicating factors arise or when transitions in care occur) and whether the current plan is too complex for the individual’s self-management ability or for the care partners providing care (16). Particular attention should be paid to complications that can develop over short periods of time and/or would significantly impair functional status, such as visual and lower-extremity complications. **Table 13.1** suggests a structured approach to screening for common geriatric syndromes and other causes of functional impairment using key screening questions, followed by validated screening tools when specific geriatric syndromes are suspected, as well as resources for scoring. These tools should be used when clinically indicated and can be performed by any member of the diabetes care team. Importantly, the general care principles discussed here apply to all individuals with complex health needs and are not limited to older adults.

## NEUROCOGNITIVE FUNCTION

> **Recommendation**  
> **13.3** Screening for early detection of mild cognitive impairment or dementia should be performed for adults 65 years of age or older at the initial visit, annually, and as appropriate. **B**

Older adults with diabetes are at higher risk of cognitive decline and institutionalization than older adults without diabetes (17–19). Presentation of cognitive impairment ranges from subtle executive dysfunction to memory loss to overt dementia. People with diabetes have higher incidences of all-cause dementia, Alzheimer disease, and vascular dementia than people without diabetes (20). People with Alzheimer disease or other dementias are more likely to develop diabetes than those without it; this possible link emphasizes critical metabolic processes that contribute to neurodegeneration (21). Both hyperglycemia and hypoglycemia are associated with a decline in cognitive function (22,23), and longer duration of diabetes is associated with worsening cognitive function. A newly

<table>
<thead>
<tr>
<th colspan="2">Using the 4Ms framework of age-friendly health systems to address person-specific issues that can affect diabetes management</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
<strong>WHAT MATTERS MOST</strong>
<ul>
<li>Discussing goals and expectations</li>
<li>Symptom and disease burden</li>
<li>Meal and treatment preferences (e.g., injections and glucose monitoring)</li>
<li>Risks, burdens, and benefits of treatment</li>
<li>Loneliness, social isolation, and overall quality of life</li>
<li>Life expectancy</li>
</ul>
</td>
<td>
<strong>MEDICATIONS</strong>
<ul>
<li>Risk of hypoglycemia, hypoglycemia unawareness, and fear of hypoglycemia</li>
<li>Treatment burden</li>
<li>Affordability or insurance coverage</li>
<li>End-organ disease or complications affecting medication choice</li>
<li>Polypharmacy</li>
<li>History of adverse medication effects</li>
<li>Social and family support</li>
</ul>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<strong>MENTATION</strong>
<ul>
<li>Self-administration of medications</li>
<li>Ability to use diabetes technology</li>
<li>Anxiety, depression, and diabetes distress</li>
<li>Mild cognitive impairment or dementia</li>
<li>Coping skills and self-care</li>
</ul>
</td>
<td>
<strong>MOBILITY</strong>
<ul>
<li>Foot complications</li>
<li>Functional ability</li>
<li>Frailty and sarcopenia</li>
<li>Gait imbalance and dizziness</li>
<li>Neuropathy</li>
<li>Vision and hearing impairment</li>
</ul>
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

**Figure 13.1**—Using the 4Ms framework of age-friendly health systems to address person-specific issues that can affect diabetes management.

2025  December 10 on guest by http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S277/848834/dc26s013.pdf Downloaded from



---



diabetesjournals.org/care     Older Adults  S279

# Table 13.1—Geriatric Syndromes and Other Functional Impairments: Key Symptoms and Suggested Screening Approaches

<table>
<thead>
<tr>
  <th>Domain</th>
  <th>Sample Screening Questions</th>
  <th>Suggested Screening Measure</th>
  <th>No. of Items</th>
  <th>Score Range</th>
  <th>Cut Points</th>
  <th>Time to Complete</th>
  <th>Measure Translated to Languages</th>
  <th>Notes</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
  <td>Geriatric Syndromes Cognitive Impairment or Dementia</td>
<td>Have you noticed any changes in your memory or ability to think clearly?</td>
<td>Mini-Cog (31)</td>
<td>5</td>
<td>0–5</td>
<td>3 validated for dementia screening</td>
<td>3 min</td>
<td>Multiple</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
  <td>Delirium</td>
<td>What day of the week is it?</td>
<td>4AT (182)</td>
<td>4</td>
<td>0–12</td>
<td>24 possible delirium</td>
<td>2 min</td>
<td>Multiple</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
  <td>Depression</td>
<td>During the past month, have you often been bothered by feeling down, depressed, or hopeless?</td>
<td>Geriatric Depression Scale 5 (GDS-5) (183,184)</td>
<td>5</td>
<td>0–5</td>
<td>22 possible depression</td>
<td>2 min</td>
<td>Multiple</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
  <td>Falls and Risk of Falling</td>
<td>Have you fallen in the past year or are you afraid of falling due to a balance or walking problem?</td>
<td>STEADI tool (185)</td>
<td>3</td>
<td>0–3</td>
<td>A single “yes” response to any question indicates an increased risk of falling</td>
<td>1–2 min</td>
<td>Multiple</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
  <td>Frailty</td>
<td>Have you felt unusually tired recently or had difficulty walking up steps without resting?</td>
<td>Clinical Frailty Scale (CFS) (186)</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>1–9</td>
<td>25 clinically meaningful frailty</td>
<td>1–2 min</td>
<td>Multiple</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
  <td>Malnutrition</td>
<td>Have you unintentionally lost weight in the last 6 months?</td>
<td>Mini Nutritional Assessment Short Form (MNA-SF) (187)</td>
<td>6</td>
<td>0–14</td>
<td>12–14 normal nutritional status; 8–11 at risk for malnutrition; 0–7 malnourished</td>
<td>5 min</td>
<td>Multiple</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
  <td>Pain</td>
<td>Are you currently experiencing any pain?</td>
<td>Numeric Pain Rating Scale</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>0–10</td>
<td>1–2 mild; 4–6 moderate; 7–10 severe</td>
<td>1–2 min</td>
<td>NA</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
  <td>Polypharmacy</td>
<td>Think you should, or are you experiencing more medications than you think you should, or are you experiencing side effects?</td>
<td>Beers Criteria or review all prescription and nonprescription medications (188)</td>
<td>NA</td>
<td>List review</td>
<td>The presence of any medication on the list warrants review, especially if the risk outweighs the benefit</td>
<td>Multiple</td>
<td>Multiple</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
  <td>Sarcopenia</td>
<td>Have you had difficulty walking across a room or climbing a flight of stairs in the past year? Do you have difficulty hearing, even when using a hearing aid?</td>
<td>SARC-F Questionnaire (189) Whisper Test (190)</td>
<td>5</td>
<td>0–10</td>
<td>24 sarcopenia risk</td>
<td>2–3 min</td>
<td>Multiple</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
  <td>Sensory Impairment: Hearing</td>
<td>Possible hearing loss: unable to repeat at least 3 of the random letters and numbers</td>
<td>Whisper Test (190)</td>
<td>6</td>
<td>NA</td>
<td>2–3 min</td>
<td>NA</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

2025 December 10 on guest by Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S277/848834/dc26s013.pdf



---



Diabetes Care  Volume 49, Supplement 1, January 2026

<table>
    <thead>
    <tr>
        <th rowspan="8">Table 13.1—Continued</th>
        <th>Measure translated languages</th>
        <th rowspan="8">Sensory  impairment: Do  you have difficulty Snellen  chart1NA20/40  or  worse 2–3  minNA visionseeing,  even  when indicates vision wearing your glasses?impairment</th>
        <th>Multiple</th>
        <th>Multiple</th>
        <th>-</th>
        <th>NA</th>
        <th>NA</th>
        <th>Multiple</th>
        <th rowspan="8">This  table  summarizes  key  symptoms  and  suggested  screening  approaches  for  common  geriatric  syndromes  and  other  functional  impairments  that  can  be  present  in  older  adults  with  diabetes.  NA,  not applicable.</th>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <th>Time  to complete</th>
        <th>3  min</th>
        <th>1–2  min</th>
        <th>-</th>
        <th>1–2  min</th>
        <th>NA</th>
        <th>3–5  min</th>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <th>Cut  points</th>
        <th>≥8  insomnia</th>
        <th>The  tool  classifies type of  incontinence based  on  responses</th>
        <th>-</th>
        <th>0,  significant impairment;  1,  mild to  moderate impairment;  2, limited to  no impairment</th>
        <th>NA</th>
        <th>≥180  s  indicates impairment  in executive  function</th>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <th>Score range</th>
        <th>0–28</th>
        <th>NA</th>
        <th>-</th>
        <th>0–2</th>
        <th>NA</th>
        <th>Time  to  finish</th>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <th>No.  of  items</th>
        <th>7</th>
        <th>3</th>
        <th>-</th>
        <th>2</th>
        <th>NA</th>
        <th>25</th>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <th>Suggested  screening measure</th>
        <th>Insomnia  Severity  Index 7 (ISI-7)  (191)</th>
        <th>3  Incontinence  Questions (3IQ)  (192)</th>
        <th>-</th>
        <th>Button and  coin  test: button and  unbutton a shirt  button and  pick up a  small  coin  from  a  flat surface</th>
        <th>Orthostatic  vital  signs; neurological examination  (e.g., assessment  of gait, balance,  reflexes, sensory  loss,  vestibular function);  medical evaluation</th>
        <th>Trail  Making  Test B</th>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <th>Sample  screening questions</th>
        <th>Do  you have trouble falling asleep,  staying asleep,  or  waking  up too  early  and  not  being able  to  fall  back asleep?</th>
        <th>Do  you have trouble with bladder control or accidental  leakage?</th>
        <th>-</th>
        <th>Do  you have trouble using your hands  for everyday tasks  like  buttoning clothes?</th>
        <th>Do  you experience dizziness,  feeling lightheaded,  or a  feeling of spinning  (vertigo)? Have  you noticed  any changes  in your  balance or steadiness?</th>
        <th>Do  you find  it  hard  to plan  or organize  your daily  activities?</th>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <th>Domain</th>
        <th>Sleep  disorders:  insomnia</th>
        <th>Urinary  incontinence</th>
        <th>Functional  impairments</th>
        <th>Dexterity</th>
        <th>Dizziness</th>
        <th>Executive functioning</th>
    </tr>
</table>

Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S277/848834/dc26s013.pdf by guest on 10 December 2025



---


diabetesjournals.org/care     Older  Adults  S281

recognized clinical entity, diabetes-related dementia, is emerging as distinct from Alzheimer disease and vascular dementia. Diabetes-related dementia is characterized by a slower progression of dementia, absence of typical neuroimaging findings, advanced age, elevated A1C levels, long duration of diabetes, high frequency of insulin use, frailty, sarcopenia, and dynapenia (loss of muscle strength not caused by neurologic or muscular diseases) (23). Ongoing studies are evaluating whether lifestyle interventions may help to maintain cognitive function in older adults (24). However, studies on diabetes prevention or intensive glycemic and blood pressure management have not demonstrated a reduction in cognitive decline (25,26). Several glucose-lowering drugs, such as thiazolidinediones, glucagon-like peptide 1 receptor agonists (GLP-1 RAs) and sodium–glucose cotransporter 2 (SGLT2) inhibitors, have shown small benefits on slowing progression of cognitive decline (27). A systematic review and meta-analysis found that although cardioprotective glucose-lowering therapies were not associated with a reduction in all-cause dementia, GLP-1 RAs were associated with a statistically significant reduction in all-cause dementia (28). Notably, cardiovascular risk factors are also associated with an increased risk of cognitive decline and dementia. Management of blood pressure and cholesterol lowering with statins have been associated with a reduced risk of incident dementia and are, thus, particularly important in older adults with diabetes.

Older adults with diabetes should be carefully screened and monitored for cognitive impairment (2). Several assessment tools are available to screen for cognitive impairment (29,30), such as the Mini-Cog (31), Mini-Mental State Examination (32), and the Montreal Cognitive Assessment (33), which may help identify individuals with dementia (who are experiencing memory loss, a decrease in executive function, and declines in their basic and instrumental activities of daily living) or those requiring neuropsychological evaluation when dementia is suspected. Annual screening is indicated for adults 65 years of age or older for early detection of mild cognitive impairment or dementia (6,34). Screening for cognitive impairment should also be performed when an individual presents with a significant decline in clinical status due to increased problems with self-care activities and medication management, such as errors in calculating insulin dose, difficulty counting carbohydrates, skipped meals, skipped insulin doses, and difficulty recognizing, preventing, or treating hypoglycemia. People who screen positive for cognitive impairment should receive diagnostic assessment as appropriate, including referral to a behavioral health professional for formal cognitive and neuropsychological evaluation if indicated and feasible (35).

Identifying cognitive impairment early has important implications for diabetes care. The presence of cognitive impairment can make it challenging to reach individualized glycemic, blood pressure, and lipid goals. Cognitive dysfunction may make it difficult for individuals to perform complex self-care tasks (29), such as monitoring glucose, administering and adjusting insulin doses, and maintaining the timing and nutritional content of meals. These factors increase risk for hypoglycemia, which, in turn, can worsen cognitive function and have multiple other adverse effects in older individuals with diabetes. When cognitive dysfunction is identified, it is therefore essential to simplify care plans and engage the appropriate support structure to assist aging individuals with diabetes in all aspects of their care.

## HYPOGLYCEMIA

> **Recommendations**  
> **13.4** Ascertain and address episodes of hypoglycemia at routine visits because older adults with diabetes have a greater risk of hypoglycemia, especially when treated with hypoglycemic agents (e.g., sulfonylureas, meglitinides, and insulin). **B**  
> **13.5** Recommend continuous glucose monitoring (CGM) for older adults with type 1 diabetes **A** and type 2 diabetes on insulin therapy **B** to improve glycemic outcomes, reduce hypoglycemia, and reduce treatment burden.  
> **13.6** Consider the use of automated insulin delivery systems **B** and other advanced insulin delivery devices such as connected pens **E** to reduce risk of hypoglycemia for older adults, based on individual ability and support system.

Older adults may be at higher risk of hypoglycemia for many reasons, including irregular meal intake, particularly in the setting of requiring insulin therapy, and worsening kidney function (36). As described above, older adults have higher rates of cognitive impairment and dementia, leading to difficulties in performing complex self-care activities (e.g., glucose monitoring, insulin administration and dose adjustment). Cognitive decline has been associated with increased risk of hypoglycemia, and conversely, severe hypoglycemia has been linked to increased risk of dementia (37–39). Therefore, as discussed in Recommendation 13.3, it is important to routinely screen older adults for cognitive impairment and dementia and discuss findings with the individuals and their care partners.

People with diabetes and their care partners should be routinely queried about any history of hypoglycemic events, impaired hypoglycemia awareness, and fear of hypoglycemia as discussed in section 6, “Glycemic Goals, Hypoglycemia, and Hyperglycemic Crises.” Symptoms and signs of hypoglycemia are also discussed in section 6 and are of value to care partners of individuals with cognitive impairment who may not be able to report hypoglycemia symptoms. Older adults can also be stratified for future risk for hypoglycemia with validated risk calculators (e.g., Kaiser Hypoglycemia Model for adults with type 2 diabetes) (40) and with consideration of hypoglycemia risk factors (**Table 6.5**). An important step to mitigate hypoglycemia risk is to determine whether the person with diabetes is skipping meals or has difficulty correctly taking and dosing their glucose-lowering medications. Glycemic goals and pharmacologic treatments may need to be adjusted to minimize the occurrence of hypoglycemic events, prioritizing use of medications at low risk for hypoglycemia and other adverse effects (41). This recommendation is also supported by results from multiple randomized controlled trials (RCTs), such as the Action to Control Cardiovascular Risk in Diabetes (ACCORD) study and the Veterans Affairs Diabetes Trial (VADT), which showed that intensive treatment protocols aimed to achieve an A1C <6.0% with complex drug plans significantly increased the risk for hypoglycemia requiring assistance compared with standard treatment (42,43). However, these intensive treatment plans included extensive use of insulin and minimal use of GLP-1 RAs, and they preceded the availability of SGLT2 inhibitors. Hypoglycemia

2025  December 10 on guest by http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S277/848834/dc26s013.pdf Downloaded from


---



S282  Older  Adults     Diabetes Care Volume  49,  Supplement  1,  January  2026

may also be precipitated by acute illness and other stressful events such as trauma or surgery. During these events, older adults and their care partners should be provided individualized guidance on glycemic monitoring and adjustment of glucose-lowering medications to prevent hypoglycemia. See **INTERCURRENT ILLNESS** in section 6, “Glycemic Goals, Hypoglycemia, and Hyperglycemic Crises,” for more details.

## Use of Continuous Glucose Monitoring and Advanced Insulin Delivery Devices

Continuous glucose monitoring (CGM) devices have been shown to be effective at improving glycemic management and acceptable to people of all age-groups, including older individuals with type 1 diabetes (44–48) or insulin-requiring type 2 diabetes (49,50). Additionally, benefits have been shown with CGM use in older individuals not treated with insulin, particularly for reducing hypoglycemia and improving other glycemic outcomes. Importantly, it may take longer for older adults to learn and gain facility with new technology and it may be beneficial to engage their caregivers in the process. Moreover, it is important to assess a person’s cognitive and functional capacity for using technology and to ensure availability of engagement and support of the care partner, if appropriate (51). CGM may also be useful for glucose monitoring in older adults with physical and/or cognitive limitations who require monitoring of blood glucose by a surrogate and in those who reside in group homes, assisted living facilities, or other post-acute long-term care settings.

Advanced insulin delivery devices have similarly been shown to improve glycemic outcomes in small studies conducted among older adults. The Older Adult Closed Loop (ORACL) trial in 30 older adults (mean age 67 years) with type 1 diabetes found that an automated insulin delivery (AID) strategy was associated with significant improvements in time in range (TIR), as well as modest improvements in hypoglycemia, compared with sensor-augmented pump therapy (52). In a different open-label, crossover design clinical trial in 37 older adults (aged ≥60 years), 16 weeks of treatment with a hybrid closed-loop advanced insulin delivery system improved TIR and reduced time above range compared with sensor-augmented pump therapy; however, in contrast to the ORACL study, no significant differences in hypoglycemia were observed (53). Both studies enrolled older individuals whose blood glucose was relatively well managed at baseline (mean A1C ∼7.4%). A later RCT of older adults with type 2 diabetes using multiple daily injections who were unable to manage insulin therapy on their own demonstrated an increase of TIR of 27% over 12 weeks of AID use in addition to tailored home health care services (54). More recently, in the Automated Insulin Delivery in Elderly With Type 1 Diabetes (AIDE T1D) study that included 82 adults aged 65 years and older, participants randomized to AID use experienced less hypoglycemia than those randomized to hybrid closed loop, predictive low glucose suspend, and sensor-augmented pump therapy in a crossover design (55). In the extension phase of the study, 91% of the participants chose the AID system (55). Finally, a real-world evidence analysis of a Medicare population (4,243 individuals, 89% with type 1 diabetes, mean age 67.4 years) also indicated that initiating hybrid closed-loop insulin delivery was associated with improvements in mean glucose and a 10% increase in TIR (56). These studies provide evidence that older individuals with type 1 and type 2 diabetes can successfully use advanced insulin delivery technologies to improve glycemic outcomes, as has been seen in younger populations.

## TREATMENT GOALS

> **Recommendations**  
> **13.7a** Older adults with diabetes with few and stable coexisting chronic illnesses, and intact cognitive and functional status, should have lower glycemic goals (such as A1C <7.0–7.5% [<53–58 mmol/mol]) and/or time in range [TIR] 70–180 mg/dL [3.9–10.0 mmol/L] of ≥70% and time below range ≤70 mg/dL [≤3.9 mmol/L] of ≤4%) if CGM is used. **C**  
> **13.7b** Older adults with diabetes and intermediate or complex health are clinically heterogeneous with variable life expectancy. Selection of glycemic goals should be individualized and should prioritize avoidance of hypoglycemia, with less stringent goals (such as A1C <8.0% [<64 mmol/mol] and/or TIR 70–180 mg/dL [3.9–10.0 mmol/L] of ≥50% and time below range <70 mg/dL [3.9 mmol/L] of <1%) for those with significant cognitive and/or functional limitations, frailty, severe comorbidities, and a less favorable risk-to-benefit ratio of diabetes medications. **C**  
> **13.7c** Older adults with very complex or poor health receive minimal benefit from stringent glycemic goals. Clinicians should focus on avoiding hypoglycemia and symptomatic hyperglycemia. **C**  
> **13.8** Screening for diabetes complications should be individualized in older adults with diabetes. Prioritize screening for complications that would lead to impairment of functional status or quality of life. **C**  
> **13.9** The on-treatment blood pressure goal for most older adults with diabetes is <130/80 mmHg when it can be achieved safely, **A** and more a relaxed blood pressure goal (e.g., <140/90 mmHg) may be used for people with poor health, limited life expectancy, or high risk for adverse effects of hypertensive therapy. **E**  
> **13.10** Treatment of other cardiovascular risk factors should be individualized in older adults with diabetes, considering the time frame of benefit. Lipid-lowering therapy and antiplatelet agents may benefit those with life expectancies at least equal to the time frame of primary prevention or secondary intervention trials. **A**

As for all people with diabetes, diabetes self-management education and ongoing diabetes self-management support are vital components of diabetes care for older adults and their caregivers. Self-management knowledge and skills should be reassessed following a significant clinical change or hospitalization, when treatment plan changes are made, or when an individual’s functional abilities diminish. In addition, declining or impaired ability to perform diabetes self-care behaviors may be an indication that an older person with diabetes needs a referral for cognitive and physical functional assessment, using age-normalized evaluation tools, as well as help establishing a support structure for diabetes care (5,35). See **Table 13.1** for screening and evaluation tools for geriatric syndromes and other functional impairments.

The care of older adults with diabetes is complicated by their clinical, cognitive, and functional heterogeneity and their

2025  December 10 on guest by http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S277/848834/dc26s013.pdf Downloaded from



---


diabetesjournals.org/care     Older  Adults  S283

varied prior experience with disease management. Some older individuals may have developed diabetes years earlier and have significant complications, others are newly diagnosed and may have had years of undiagnosed diabetes with resultant complications, and still, other older adults may have truly recent-onset disease with few or no complications (57). Some older adults with diabetes have other underlying chronic conditions, substantial diabetes-related comorbidity, limited cognitive or physical functioning, or frailty (58,59). Other older individuals with diabetes have little comorbidity and intact cognitive and physical functioning.

Life expectancy is affected by the age of the individual, disease burden, and degrees of frailty and disability. Multiple prognostic tools for life expectancy for older adults are available (60,61). The Life Expectancy Estimator for Older Adults with Diabetes (LEAD) tool was developed and validated among older adults with diabetes, and a high risk score was strongly associated with having a life expectancy of <5 years (62). These data may be a useful starting point to inform decisions about selecting less stringent glycemic goals, particularly when more stringent goals may necessitate use of pharmacotherapies with higher risk of hypoglycemia and other adverse effect profiles (62,63). Older adults also vary in their preferences for the intensity and mode of glucose management (64). Health care professionals caring for older adults with diabetes must take this heterogeneity into consideration when engaging people with diabetes in shared decision-making to establish treatment goals (14,15,41) (Table 13.2). In addition, older adults with diabetes should be assessed for disease treatment and self-management knowledge, health literacy, and mathematical literacy (numeracy) at the onset and throughout treatment. Limited time for medical visits, and competing priorities such as acute problems or change in living situation or social support, can make implementation of these recommendations challenging. See Fig. 6.1 for individual/disease-related factors to consider when determining individualized glycemic goals.

A1C results may be inaccurate in those who have received blood transfusions and who have medical conditions that affect red blood cell turnover (see section 2, “Diagnosis and Classification of Diabetes,” for additional details on the limitations of A1C) (65). Conditions affecting red blood cell turnover that are common in older adults include kidney failure, recent significant blood loss, and erythropoietin therapy. In these instances, blood glucose monitoring and/or CGM should be used for glycemic goal setting (Table 13.2). Serum glycated protein assays such as fructosamine may also be useful for glycemic monitoring in conjunction with other measures (see section 6, “Glycemic Goals, Hypoglycemia, and Hyperglycemic Crises”) (66–68).

## Older Adults With Good Functional Status and Without Complications

There are few long-term studies in older adults demonstrating the benefits of intensive glycemic, blood pressure, and lipid management. Older adults who can be expected to live long enough to realize the benefits of long-term intensive diabetes management, who have good cognitive and physical function, and who experience little (or acceptable to them) burden of treatment may be treated using therapeutic interventions and goals similar to those for younger adults with diabetes (Table 13.2).

## Older Adults With Complications and Reduced Functionality

Older adults with diabetes categorized as having complex or intermediate health (Table 13.2) are still heterogeneous with respect to their function and life expectancy (69–71). Based on concepts of competing mortality and time to benefit, individuals with shorter life expectancy, advanced diabetes complications, life-limiting comorbid illnesses, frailty, or substantial cognitive or functional impairments will have less benefit from glucose lowering and should have less stringent glycemic goals (72). These individuals may not only not derive benefit from intensive glucose lowering but are also more likely to experience serious adverse effects of treatment, such as hypoglycemia (73). However, significant hyperglycemia should also be avoided—even in the setting of complex health status—as elevated glucose levels (>180 mg/dL [>10 mmol/L]) increase risks of dehydration, weakness, infection, poor wound healing, and hyperglycemic crises (74). Glycemic goals should, at a minimum, avoid these consequences. Factors to consider for individualizing glycemic goals are outlined in Fig. 6.1 and Fig. 13.1.

Clinicians should also consider the balance of risks and benefits of an individual’s diabetes medications, including disease-specific benefits (such as reducing symptomatic heart failure or stabilizing chronic kidney disease) and burdens such as hypoglycemia risk, tolerability, difficulties of administration, inadequate support system, and financial cost. In addition, attention to oral health, vision and hearing loss, foot care, fall prevention, and early detection of depression will improve quality of life.

While **Table 13.2** provides overall guidance for identifying individuals with complex and very complex health needs, there is no global consensus on the optimal classification strategy. Empiric research on the classification of older adults with diabetes based on comorbid illness has suggested three broad classes of individuals: a healthy, a geriatric, and a cardiovascular class (14,69,75). The geriatric class has the highest prevalence of obesity, hypertension, arthritis, and incontinence, while the cardiovascular class has the highest prevalence of myocardial infarctions, heart failure, and stroke. Compared with the healthy class, the cardiovascular class has the highest risk of frailty and subsequent mortality. Additional research is needed to develop a reproducible classification scheme to distinguish the natural history of disease as well as differential response to glucose management and specific glucose-lowering agents (76).

## Older Adults at the End of Life

For people with diabetes receiving palliative care and end-of-life care, the focus should be to avoid hypoglycemia and symptomatic hyperglycemia while reducing the burdens of glycemic management. Thus, as organ failure develops, the treatment plan should be deintensified. At the end of life, most agents for type 2 diabetes may be removed (77). There is, however, no consensus for the end-of-life management of type 1 diabetes (78). Consultation with a geriatric or palliative care specialist might be warranted to assist with complex medical and functional issues as well as advance care planning. See END-OF-LIFE CARE, below, for additional information.

## Beyond Glycemic Management

Although minimizing hyperglycemia may be important in older individuals with

2025  December 10 on guest by http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S277/848834/dc26s013.pdf Downloaded from


---



<table>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Characteristics and health status of person with diabetes</th>
<th>Rationale</th>
<th>Reasonable A1C Goal*</th>
<th>Reasonable CGM Goals</th>
<th>Fasting or preprandial glucose</th>
<th>Bedtime blood pressure</th>
<th>Lipids</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Healthy (few coexisting chronic illnesses, intact cognitive and functional status)</td>
<td>Longer remaining life expectancy</td>
<td>&lt;7.0–7.5% (53–58 mmol/mol)</td>
<td>TR 70–180 mg/dL (3.9–10.0 mmol/l) or &lt;70% and TBR &lt;70 mg/dl (&lt;3.9 mmol/l)</td>
<td>80–180 mg/dl (5.0–8.3 mmol/l)</td>
<td>80–120/80–130 mmHg (4.4–7.2/5.0–11.0 mmHg)</td>
<td>&lt;130/80 mmHg</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Complex/intermediate (multiple coexisting chronic illnesses or two or more ADL impairments to moderate cognitive impairment)</td>
<td>Variable life expectancy. Considering:  
* Severity of comorbidities  
* Cognitive and functional limitations  
* Frailty  
* Risk-to-benefit ratio of diabetes medications  
* Individual preference</td>
<td>8.0% (&lt;64 mmol/mol)</td>
<td>TR 70–180 mg/dL (3.9–10.0 mmol/l) or &lt;50% and TBR &lt;70 mg/dl (&lt;3.9 mmol/l)</td>
<td>90–150 mg/dl (5.6–8.3 mmol/l)</td>
<td>100–180/60–100 mmHg (5.6–11.1/3.9–5.0 mmol/l)</td>
<td>130/80 mmHg</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Very complex/poor health (PALTC or end-stage chronic illness or moderate to severe cognitive impairment or two or more ADL impairments)</td>
<td>Limited remaining life expectancy makes benefit minimal</td>
<td>100–180 mg/dl (5.6–10.0 mmol/l)</td>
<td>110–200 mg/dl (6.1–11.1 mmol/l)</td>
<td>140/90 mmHg</td>
<td>Consider likelihood of benefit with statin</td>
<td>Statin, unless contraindicated or not tolerated</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

> **Table 13.2—Framework for considering treatment goals for glycemia, blood pressure, and dyslipidemia in older adults with diabetes**  
> Characteristics and health status of person with diabetes, reasonable A1C goal, reasonable CGM goals, fasting or preprandial glucose, bedtime blood pressure, and lipids.  
>  
> This table represents a consensus framework for considering treatment goals for glycemia, blood pressure, and dyslipidemia in older adults with diabetes. The characteristic categories are general concepts, not every individual will fall into a particular category. Consideration of individual and partner preferences, care partner engagement, abilities, and resources is an important aspect of treatment individualization. Additionally, the health status and preferences may change over time. ADL activities of daily living, CGM continuous glucose monitoring, PALTC post-acute and long-term care, TBR the lower range, TIR the time in range. *A lower A1C goal may be set for an individual if tolerable without recurrent or severe hypoglycemia or undue treatment burden.  
> ‡The presence of multiple chronic illnesses, such as stage 3–4 chronic failure or oxygen-dependent lung disease, chronic kidney disease requiring dialysis, or uncontrolled metastatic cancer, may cause significant symptoms or impairment or unintentional weight loss and significantly reduce life expectancy. Adapted from Kirkman et al. (5).



---


diabetesjournals.org/care     Older  Adults  S285

diabetes, greater reductions in morbidity and mortality are likely to result from a clinical focus on comprehensive cardiovascular risk factor modification. There is strong evidence from clinical trials of the value of treating hypertension in older adults (79–81), with treatment of hypertension to individualized blood pressure goals indicated in most. There is less evidence for lipid-lowering therapy and aspirin therapy, although the benefits of these interventions for primary and secondary prevention are likely to apply to older adults whose life expectancies equal or exceed the time frames of the clinical trials (82). In the case of statins, the follow-up time of clinical trials ranged from 2 to 6 years. While the time frame of trials can be used to inform treatment decisions, a more specific concept is the time to benefit for a therapy, which, for statins, is 2.5 years (83).

# LIFESTYLE MANAGEMENT

> **Recommendations**  
> **13.11a** Recommend healthful eating with adequate protein intake (at least 0.8 g/kg body weight/day) for older adults with diabetes to maintain and potentially higher, individualized amounts to regain lean body mass and function. **B**  
> **13.11b** Recommend regular physical activity, including aerobic activity, weight-bearing exercise, and resistance training as tolerated in those who can safely engage in such activities, particularly to maintain lean body mass, especially in those pursuing weight loss. **B**  
> **13.12** For older adults with type 2 diabetes, overweight or obesity, and the capacity to exercise safely, an intensive lifestyle intervention focused on dietary changes, physical activity, and weight loss (e.g., 5–7%) should be considered for its benefits on quality of life, mobility and physical functioning, and cardiometabolic risk. **A**

Lifestyle management in older adults should be tailored to frailty status. Diabetes in the aging population is associated with reduced muscle strength, poor muscle quality, and accelerated loss of muscle mass, which may result in sarcopenia or dynapenia (84) and/or osteopenia (85). Diabetes is also recognized as an independent risk factor for frailty. Frailty is characterized by a decline in physical performance and an increased risk of negative health outcomes due to physiological vulnerability and functional or psychosocial stressors. Inadequate nutritional intake, particularly inadequate protein intake, can increase the risk of sarcopenia and frailty in older adults. There is no current evidence showing that adjusting protein intake beyond the general recommendations (0.8–1.5 g/kg body weight/day or 15–20% of calories) improves glycemic management or cardiovascular outcomes in individuals with diabetes (86,87). Nevertheless, individualized protein goals may be beneficial, as some research suggests that moderately higher protein intake (20–30%) can support diabetes management by enhancing satiety (88). In populations with sarcopenia, interventions combining protein supplementation with resistance exercise have resulted in increases in muscle mass and muscle strength (89). Special attention should be paid to malnutrition or the risk of malnutrition in older adults with diabetes given its association with sarcopenia (90,91). Malnutrition is also associated with decreases in activities of daily living, grip strength, physical performance of lower limbs, cognition, and quality of life (92–94). See section 5, “Facilitating Positive Health Behaviors and Well-being to Improve Health Outcomes,” for a description of malnutrition and screening recommendations. Management of malnutrition, sarcopenia, and frailty in diabetes includes optimal nutrition with adequate protein intake combined with a physical activity program that includes aerobic, weight-bearing, and resistance training. The benefits of a structured physical activity program (as in the Lifestyle Interventions and Independence for Elders [LIFE] study) in frail older adults include reducing sedentary time, preventing mobility disability, and reducing frailty (95). The goal of these programs is not weight loss but enhanced functional status. For nonfrail older adults with type 2 diabetes and overweight or obesity, an intensive lifestyle intervention designed to reduce weight is beneficial across multiple outcomes. The Look AHEAD (Action for Health in Diabetes) trial is described in section 8, “Obesity and Weight Management for the Prevention and Treatment of Diabetes.” Look AHEAD specifically excluded individuals with a low functional status. It enrolled people between 45 and 74 years of age and required that they be able to perform a maximal exercise test (96,97). Although the Look AHEAD trial did not achieve its primary outcome of reducing cardiovascular events, the intensive lifestyle intervention produced multiple clinical benefits, including weight loss, improved physical fitness, increased HDL cholesterol, lowered systolic blood pressure, reduced A1C levels, reduced waist circumference, and reduced need for medications (98). Subgroup analyses found improved cardiovascular outcomes among participants who lost at least 10% of baseline body weight in the first year (99). Risk factor management improved with reduced use of antihypertensive medications, statins, and insulin (100). Age-stratified analyses showed that older adults in the trial (aged 60–70 years) experienced benefits similar to those seen for younger participants (101,102). The lifestyle intervention also produced benefits on aging-relevant outcomes, including reductions in multimorbidity, improved physical function, and enhanced quality of life (103–106).

# PHARMACOLOGIC THERAPY

> **Recommendations**  
> **13.13** Select medications with low risk of hypoglycemia in older adults with type 2 diabetes, specifically for those with hypoglycemia risk factors. **B**  
> **13.14a** Deintensify hypoglycemia-causing medications (e.g., insulin, sulfonylureas, or meglitinides) or switch to a medication class with low hypoglycemia risk for individuals who are at high risk for hypoglycemia, using individualized glycemic goals. **B**  
> **13.14b** In older adults with diabetes, deintensify diabetes medications for individuals for whom the harms and/or burdens of treatment may be greater than the benefits, within individualized glycemic goals. **E**  
> **13.14c** Simplify complex treatment plans (especially insulin) to reduce the risk of hypoglycemia and polypharmacy and to decrease treatment burden. **B**  
> **13.14d** In older adults with type 2 diabetes and established or high risk of atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease, heart failure, and/or chronic kidney disease, the treatment plan should include agents that reduce cardiovascular and kidney disease risk, irrespective of glycemia. **A**

2025  December 10 on guest by http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S277/848834/dc26s013.pdf Downloaded from


---



Older Adults  
Diabetes Care Volume 49, Supplement 1, January 2026

### 13.15 Consider costs of care and coverage when developing treatment plans to reduce risk of cost-related barriers to taking medication and performing self-management behaviors. **B**

Special care is required in prescribing and monitoring pharmacologic therapies in older adults, who are at high risk of polypharmacy and its adverse sequelae, often have nuanced considerations for choice of specific medication classes, and may have cognitive and/or functional impairments that affect the capacity for safe self-management. Therapeutic choices should also take into consideration whether older adults with diabetes live independently, have an engaged and available caregiver, or live in a skilled nursing facility, assisted living facility, or group home (and what level of assistance for medication taking and glucose monitoring is available in these facilities). It is important to match complexity of the treatment plan to the self-management ability of older adults with diabetes and their available social and medical support. Cost may be an especially important consideration, as older adults are often treated with multiple medications and live on fixed incomes. Accordingly, the costs of care and insurance coverage rules should be considered when developing treatment plans to reduce the risk of cost-related barriers to use (107,108). See Fig. 9.4 for general recommendations regarding glucose-lowering treatment for adults with type 2 diabetes, **Table 9.2** for person-and drug-specific factors to consider when selecting glucose-lowering agents, and **Table 9.3** and **Table 9.4** for median monthly cost in the U.S. of noninsulin glucose-lowering agents and insulin, respectively.

Intensive glycemic management in older adults, particularly those with complex health status, with medication plans that increase the risk of hypoglycemia through use of insulin and/or sulfonylureas has been identified as overtreatment, is common in clinical practice (109–113), and may increase the risk of mortality (42). High treatment burden is another indicator of potential overtreatment. Deintensification of glucose-lowering plans can be achieved by either lowering the dose or discontinuing some medications, as long as individualized glycemic goals are maintained (114,115). Multiple studies evaluating deintensification protocols in diabetes and hypertension have shown that deintensification is safe and possibly beneficial for older adults (114). Using the 4S pathway (41), **Fig. 13.2** offers a road map for assessing treatment difficulty; reevaluating glycemic goals through shared decision-making; deintensifying, simplifying, or modifying treatments; and reassessing treatment engagement and burdens.

#### Metformin

Metformin is a good treatment option for glucose lowering in older adults with type 2 diabetes due to its low risk for hypoglycemia and simple administration profile, but prescription guidelines must be followed carefully and regularly reassessed. Metformin may be used safely in individuals with an estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) ≥30 mL/min/1.73 m² (116), although lower doses should be used in those with eGFR 30–45 mL/min/1.73 m². eGFR should be monitored every 3–6 months in those at risk for decline in kidney function. However, metformin is contraindicated in those with advanced kidney disease and should be used with caution in those with hypoperfusion, hypoxemia, and impaired hepatic function due to potential risk of lactic acidosis. Metformin may be temporarily discontinued before procedures including imaging studies using iodinated contrast, during hospitalizations, and when acute illness may compromise kidney or liver function. Additionally, metformin can cause gastrointestinal side effects (this risk can be minimized through slow uptitration at initiation) and a reduction in appetite that can be problematic for some older adults. Extended-release formulation may be used as an alternative to immediate-release formulation in older adults experiencing difficulties in maintaining medication plans or experiencing gastrointestinal effects. For those taking metformin long term (>4 years), vitamin B12 levels should be monitored annually (117).

#### Pioglitazone

Pioglitazone has low risk for hypoglycemia but should be used cautiously and in select individuals due to risks for heart failure, fluid retention, weight gain, osteoporosis, and/or macular edema (118,119). Adverse effect risks are reduced with lower doses of pioglitazone and when it is used as part of combination therapy. There may also be the beneficial effect of stroke reduction (120).

#### Insulin Secretagogues

Sulfonylureas are associated with hypoglycemia, bone loss (121), and fracture risk (122) and should be used with caution. Similarly, meglitinides (repaglinide and nateglinide) increase the risk of hypoglycemia and fracture risk (123,124). If used, sulfonylureas with a shorter duration of action, such as glipizide, may be preferred, although a recent analysis found that the risk of major adverse cardiovascular events was highest with glipizide (125). Glyburide is a longer-acting sulfonylurea with multiple active metabolites and should be avoided in older adults due to its hypoglycemia risk (126). Many antimicrobials (most commonly fluoroquinolones and sulfamethoxazole-trimethoprim) interact with sulfonylureas to increase the effective sulfonylurea dose, which may precipitate hypoglycemia (127–129). Sulfonylureas should be reduced or temporarily discontinued in these circumstances. Consistent and adequate eating patterns are essential to reducing hypoglycemia risk, and insulin secretagogues may need to be dose-reduced or held in the setting of illness, fasting, or when eating is otherwise impaired. Older adults treated with insulin secretagogues should be routinely screened for hypoglycemia, hypoglycemia awareness should be assessed, and prevention and treatment strategies should be reinforced.

#### DPP-4 Inhibitors

Dipeptidyl peptidase 4 (DPP-4) inhibitors have few side effects and minimal risk of hypoglycemia, but their cost may be a barrier to some older adults. DPP-4 inhibitors are relatively weak glucose-lowering agents and do not reduce cardiovascular or kidney disease risks like GLP-1 RAs and SGLT2 inhibitors (130). In general, these medications may be useful in older adults with mild hyperglycemia or with high risk of hypoglycemia when a GLP-1 RA or a dual glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide (GIP) and GLP-1 RA is not tolerated. DPP-4 inhibitors may be used as an alternative to metformin in older adults with low eGFR; linagliptin does not require renal dose adjustment.

#### GLP-1–Based Therapies

GLP-1 RAs and the GIP/GLP-1 RA tirzepatide are highly effective glucose-lowering

2025 December 10 on guest by http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S277/848834/dc26s013.pdf Downloaded from



---


diabetesjournals.org/care    Older Adults  S287

# Assess for difficulty with current diabetes treatment plan in older adults

<table>
  <tr>
    <td>
      <ul>
        <li>Medical event</li>
        <li>Life-altering event</li>
        <li>Change in physical, cognitive, or mental health status</li>
        <li>Medication red flags or adverse effects</li>
        <li>Changes in medication taking-behaviors</li>
        <li>Signs of unrecognized hypoglycemia</li>
        <li>Symptoms of hyperglycemia</li>
      </ul>
    </td>
<td>
      <div><strong>Step One</strong></div>
      <p>Investigate <strong>red flags</strong>, medication adverse effects, and major changes in <strong>health or function</strong>.</p>
    </td>
  </tr>
<tr>
    <td colspan="2" align="center">
      <div><strong>Step Two</strong></div>
      <p><strong>Reevaluate glycemic goals</strong> through shared decision-making. Involve care partners.</p>
    </td>
  </tr>
<tr>
    <td colspan="2" align="center">
      <div><strong>Step Three</strong></div>
      <p><strong>Deintensify, simplify,</strong> or <strong>modify</strong> the diabetes treatment plan to optimize safety, minimize polypharmacy, and target disease-specific benefits.</p>
    </td>
  </tr>
<tr>
    <td colspan="2" align="center">
      <div><strong>Step Four</strong></div>
      <p><strong>Reassess treatment engagement and burdens.</strong> Consider 2-week continuous glucose monitoring to evaluate glycemic patterns.</p>
    </td>
  </tr>
</table>

> **Figure 13.2** — Stepwise approach for assessing difficulties in the diabetes treatment plan; reevaluating glycemic goals through shared decision-making; deintensifying, simplifying, or modifying the treatment plan; and reassessing the safety and burdens of any interventions. Created using recommendations from Munshi et al. (41).

medications with low risk for hypoglycemia and can be used in the setting of reduced eGFR, including during dialysis. GLP-1 RAs have demonstrated additional cardiovascular benefits among people with diabetes and established atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease (ASCVD) and those at higher ASCVD risk, with chronic kidney disease, and with symptomatic heart failure with preserved ejection fraction in the setting of obesity. See section 9, “Pharmacologic Approaches to Glycemic Treatment,” section 10, “Cardiovascular Disease and Risk Management,” and section 11, “Chronic Kidney Disease and Risk Management,” for more extensive discussion. In a systematic review and meta-analysis of GLP-1 RA trials, these agents have been found to reduce major adverse cardiovascular events, cardiovascular deaths, stroke, and myocardial infarction to the same degree for people over and under 65 years of age (131). Weight loss achieved with use of GLP-1 RAs and the GIP/GLP-1 RA is also beneficial for obstructive sleep apnea (132), knee osteoarthritis (133), and metabolic dysfunction–associated steatohepatitis (MASH) (134–136). While the evidence for this class of agents for older adults continues to grow, there are a number of practical issues that should be considered specifically for older people. These drugs are injectable agents (with the exception of oral semaglutide) (137), which require visual, motor, and cognitive skills for appropriate administration, although most have a weekly dosing schedule. GLP-1 RAs may also be associated with nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, and/or constipation, and doses should be titrated slowly. GLP-1 RAs are therefore not preferred in older adults experiencing unexplained weight loss or undernutrition or with problematic constipation, significant gastroparesis, recurrent ileus, or bowel obstruction.

2025 December 10 on guest by http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S277/848834/dc26s013.pdf Downloaded from


---


Older Adults     Diabetes Care Volume 49, Supplement 1, January 2026

Individuals should be monitored regularly for dehydration and excessive weight loss, which may lead to significant loss of muscle mass (sarcopenia) and bone density. The risk for sarcopenia can be mitigated with adequate protein intake and resistance or strength training (89).

## SGLT2 Inhibitors
SGLT2 inhibitors are administered orally, which may be convenient for older adults with diabetes. In those with established ASCVD, these agents have shown cardiovascular benefits (138). This class of agents has also been found to be beneficial for people with heart failure and to slow the progression of chronic kidney disease. See section 9, “Pharmacologic Approaches to Glycemic Treatment,” section 10, “Cardiovascular Disease and Risk Management,” and section 11, “Chronic Kidney Disease and Risk Management,” for a more extensive discussion regarding the indications for this class of agents. Stratified analyses of the trials of this drug class indicate that older adults have similar or greater benefits than younger people (139–141). SGLT2 inhibitors are generally well tolerated among older adults, although thoughtful selection is needed to avoid adverse effects in individuals at elevated risk (142). SGLT2 inhibitors may cause clinically significant volume depletion, for which older adults are at greater risk, and should be used cautiously in older adults who are frail or prone to orthostasis (143). SGLT2 inhibitors cause a higher rate of genital mycotic infections, especially in women, and may need to be discontinued if this effect becomes burdensome (144). Their use may also be associated with a small increase in urinary tract infections; caution should be used in people with recurrent or severe urinary tract infections (144). Because SGLT2 inhibitors typically increase urine volume, symptoms of urinary incontinence should be queried before and after SGLT2 inhibitor initiation (145,146). Euglycemic diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA) is a rare but potentially serious phenomenon associated with treatment with SGLT2 inhibitors, especially in those with multimorbidity who reside in post-acute and long-term care (PALTC) settings, with infection being the most common trigger (145,147).

## Insulin Therapy
The use of insulin therapy requires that individuals or their caregivers have good visual and motor skills and cognitive ability to manage insulin dosing and administration and to recognize and treat hypoglycemia. Insulin doses, times of administration, and treatment plans should be tailored to meet individualized glycemic goals and to avoid hypoglycemia. Age alone does not limit the utility of technology, and older adults who are capable of using CGM devices or an automated insulin delivery system should be encouraged to use them as long as they help to provide safe and effective glycemic management (see discussion above).

Once-daily basal insulin injection therapy may be a reasonable option in many older adults, although noninsulin therapies are preferred due to lower risk of hypoglycemia and other potential benefits as discussed above. When choosing basal insulin, the prescriber should take into account that long-acting insulin analogs have been associated with a lower risk of emergency department visits and hospitalizations for hypoglycemia than NPH insulin in the Medicare population (148). Multiple daily injections of insulin may be too complex for many older individuals with advanced diabetes complications, life-limiting coexisting chronic illnesses, cognitive or functional impairment, or limited functional status or social support. If affordable, use of insulin pens should be preferred to syringes, mostly in older adults with functional impairment.

Studies suggest that simplification of the insulin plan to match an individual’s self-management abilities and their available social and medical support is associated with reduced hypoglycemia and disease-related distress without worsening glycemic outcomes (149–152). **Figure 13.3** depicts an algorithm, and potential approach, that can be used to simplify the insulin administration plan (151), and **Table 13.3** provides examples of and rationale for situations where deintensification and/or insulin plan simplification may be appropriate in older adults.

## Other Factors to Consider
The needs of older adults with diabetes and their care partners should be evaluated to construct a tailored care plan. Inadequate social support and reduced access to long-term services and support may reduce these individuals’ quality of life and increase the risk of functional dependency (10). The living situation must be considered as it may affect diabetes management and support needs. Social and instrumental support networks (e.g., adult children and care partners) that provide instrumental or emotional support for older adults with diabetes should be included in diabetes management discussions and shared decision-making.

The need for ongoing support of older adults becomes even greater when transitions to PALTC become necessary. Unfortunately, these transitions can lead to discontinuity in goals of care, errors in dosing, and changes in nutrition and activity (153). Older adults in assisted living facilities may not have support to administer their own medications, whereas those living in a nursing home for short-term rehabilitation or PALTC may rely on first-line care partners including nursing and care professionals with variable clinical expertise. Those receiving palliative care (with or without hospice) may require an approach that emphasizes comfort and symptom management while deemphasizing strict metabolic and blood pressure management.

## SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS FOR OLDER ADULTS WITH TYPE 1 DIABETES
Due in part to the success of modern diabetes management, people with type 1 diabetes are living longer, and the population of people over 65 years with type 1 diabetes is growing (154–156). Many of the recommendations in this section regarding comprehensive geriatric assessment and personalization of goals and treatments are directly applicable to older adults with type 1 diabetes; however, this population has unique challenges and requires distinct treatment considerations (157). Insulin is an essential life-preserving therapy for people with type 1 diabetes. To avoid DKA, older adults with type 1 diabetes need some form of basal insulin even when they are unable to ingest meals. Insulin may be delivered through injection, with an AID system, or with an insulin pump alone depending on individual preference, capability, and circumstances. CGM should be used in conjunction with any insulin delivery system. CGM is approved for use by Medicare and can play a critical role in improving A1C, reducing

</page_header>


---


diabetesjournals.org/care    Older Adults  S289

# Simplification of complex insulin therapy in people with type 2 diabetes on insulin

## Optimize technology use and caregiver engagement

<table>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Individual on basal (long- or intermediate-acting)* and/or prandial (short- or rapid-acting)† insulins</th>
<th>Individual on premixed insulin‡</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Basal insulin</td>
<td rowspan="2">Use 70% of total premixed insulin dose as basal only in the morning</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Prandial insulin</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="2">Change timing from bedtime to morning</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="2">
Titrate dose of basal insulin based on fasting glucose test results over 1 week  
<br>
Fasting goal: 90–150 mg/dL (5.0–8.3 mmol/L)  
<br>
* May change goal based on overall health and goals of care
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
If 50% of the fasting glucose values are over the goal:  
* Increase dose by ≥2 units  
If >2 fasting values/week are <80 mg/dL (<4.4 mmol/L):  
* Decrease dose by ≥2 units
</td>
<td>
If prandial insulin >10 units/dose:  
* Decrease dose by 50% and add noninsulin agent§  
* Titrate prandial insulin doses down as noninsulin agent doses are increased with aim to discontinue prandial insulin
</td>
<td>
If prandial insulin ≤10 units/dose:  
* Discontinue prandial insulin and add noninsulin agent(s)§
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="3">
Add noninsulin agents§:  
* If eGFR is ≥45 mL/min/1.73 m², start metformin 500 mg daily and increase dose every 2 weeks, as tolerated  
* If eGFR is <45 mL/min/1.73 m², individual is already taking metformin, or metformin is not tolerated, proceed to second-line agent depending on comorbidities or complications
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

### Additional Tips
* Do not use rapid- and short-acting insulin at bedtime  
* While adjusting prandial insulin, a simplified correction scale may be used, for example:  
  - For premeal glucose >250 mg/dL (>13.9 mmol/L), give 2 units of short- or rapid-acting insulin  
  - For premeal glucose >350 mg/dL (>19.4 mmol/L), give 4 units of short- or rapid-acting insulin  
* Stop correction scale when not needed daily

> Using Individual comorbidities (e.g., CKD, ASCVD, low body weight, and risk of dehydration) and drug characteristics to guide decision-making, as depicted in Fig. 9.4 and Table 9.2, select additional agent(s) as needed:  
> * Every 2 weeks, adjust insulin dose and/or add glucose-lowering medications based on glucose testing performed before lunch and before dinner  
> * Goal: 90–150 mg/dL (5.0–8.3 mmol/L) before meals; may change goal based on overall health and goals of care∣∣  
> * If 50% of premeal values over 2 weeks are above goal, increase the dose or add another agent  
> * If >2 premeal values/week are <90 mg/dL (<5.0 mmol/L), decrease the dose of medication

----

**Figure 13.3** — Algorithm to simplify insulin administration plans in older individuals. ASCVD, atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease; CKD, chronic kidney disease; eGFR, estimated glomerular filtration rate.  
*Basal insulins:* glargine U-100 and U-300, degludec, and human NPH.  
†Prandial insulins: short-acting (regular human insulin) or rapid-acting (lispro, aspart, and glulisine).  
‡Premixed insulins: 70/30, 75/25, and 50/50 products.  
§Examples of noninsulin agents include metformin, sodium-glucose cotransporter 2 inhibitors, dipeptidyl peptidase 4 inhibitors, glucagon-like peptide 1 receptor agonists (GLP1-RAs), and dual glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide (GIP) and GLP-1 RAs.  
∣∣See Table 13.2. Adapted with permission from Munshi et al. (151).

----

Glycemic variability, and reducing risk of hypoglycemia (49) (see section 7, “Diabetes Technology,” and section 9, “Pharmacologic Approaches to Glycemic Treatment”). In older people with type 1 diabetes, administration of insulin may become more difficult as complications, cognitive impairment, and functional impairment arise. This increases the importance of care partners in the lives of these individuals. Older people with type 1 diabetes may require placement in PALTC settings (i.e., nursing homes and skilled nursing facilities), and unfortunately staff in these settings continue to be less familiar with CGM devices, insulin pumps, or advanced insulin delivery devices. Nevertheless, a feasibility study in PALTC facilities showed that CGM can be useful in older adults with diabetes, although it requires substantial staff training (158). Additional studies of older adults with diabetes living in PALTC facilities using CGM revealed a high prevalence of hypoglycemia both in people using insulin and in those using sulfonylureas, thus showing that this population of older adults in PALTC facilities are at increased risk for hypoglycemia (159,160). Using CGM can provide useful and more prompt information on hypoglycemia as well as time spent in severe hyperglycemia (as noted in a study of 65 residents in 8 long-term facilities) in this population (161). Of note, a recent RCT in PALTC facilities showed that real-time CGM use for up to 60 days was safe and effective in guiding insulin doses compared with BGM by point of care. There were no differences in TIR, time below range, or mean glucose levels (162). Some staff may be less knowledgeable about the differences between type 1 and type 2 diabetes. DKA may be mistaken for sepsis, end-organ failure, or other electrolyte abnormalities. In these instances, the individual or their family may be more familiar with their current diabetes management plan than the staff or health care professionals. Education of relevant support staff and health care professionals in rehabilitation and PALTC settings regarding insulin dosing and use of pumps and CGM is important.

2025 December 10 on guest by http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S277/848834/dc26s013.pdf Downloaded from


---



S290  Older  Adults     Diabetes Care Volume  49,  Supplement  1,  January  2026

<table>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Characteristics and health status of person with diabetes</th>
<th>Reasonable glycemic goal</th>
<th>Rationale/considerations</th>
<th>When may medication plan simplification be required?</th>
<th>When may treatment deintensification be required?</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Healthy (few chronic illnesses, intact cognitive and functional status)</td>
<td>A1C &lt;7.0–7.5% (&lt;53–58 mmol/mol)</td>
<td>
* Healthy individuals can usually perform complex tasks for glycemic management  
* During acute illness, individuals may be at risk for medication administration errors
</td>
<td>
* Severe or recurrent hypoglycemia on insulin regardless of A1C  
* Wide glucose excursions  
* Cognitive or functional decline following acute illness
</td>
<td>
* Severe or recurrent hypoglycemia on insulin or sulfonylureas, regardless of A1C  
* Wide glucose excursions  
* Polypharmacy
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Complex/intermediate (multiple chronic illnesses or ≥2 ADL impairments or mild to moderate cognitive impairment)</td>
<td>A1C &lt;8.0% (&lt;64 mmol/mol)</td>
<td>
* Comorbidities may affect self-management abilities and capacity to avoid hypoglycemia
</td>
<td>
* Severe or recurrent hypoglycemia on insulin therapy, regardless of A1C  
* Difficulty managing insulin plan  
* Significant change in social circumstances, (e.g., loss of care partner or change in living situation or finances)
</td>
<td>
* Severe or recurrent hypoglycemia on insulin or sulfonylureas, regardless of A1C  
* Wide glucose excursions  
* Polypharmacy
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Community-dwelling individuals receiving short-term care in a skilled nursing facility</td>
<td>Avoid reliance on A1C; glucose goal 100–200 mg/dL (5.6–11.1 mmol/L)</td>
<td>
* Glycemic management is important for recovery, wound healing, and avoidance of infections  
* Recovery from acute illness may impair cognitive function  
* More support may be needed on transition to home
</td>
<td>
* Consider reinstating prehospitalization treatment if it increased in complexity during hospitalization
</td>
<td>
* Weight loss, anorexia, short-term cognitive decline, and/or loss of physical functioning
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Very complex/poor health (PALTC or end-stage chronic illnesses or moderate to severe cognitive impairment or ≥2 ADL impairments)</td>
<td>Avoid reliance on A1C and avoid hypoglycemia and symptomatic hyperglycemia</td>
<td>
* No benefits of tight glycemic goals in this population  
* Hypoglycemia should be avoided  
* Most important outcomes are maintenance of cognitive and functional status
</td>
<td>
* The individual would like to decrease the number of injections and finger-stick blood glucose monitoring  
* The individual has an inconsistent eating pattern
</td>
<td>
* Cognitive dysfunction, depression, anorexia, or inconsistent eating pattern while taking sulfonylureas or meglitinides  
* Taking any diabetes medications without clear benefits
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>At the end of life</td>
<td>Avoid hypoglycemia and symptomatic hyperglycemia</td>
<td>
* Goal is to provide comfort and avoid tasks or interventions that cause pain or discomfort  
* Care partners are important in providing medical care and maintaining quality of life
</td>
<td>
* Pain or discomfort caused by treatment (e.g., injections or finger sticks)  
* Excessive stress of care partners due to treatment complexity
</td>
<td>
* Taking any diabetes medications without clear benefits in improving symptoms and/or comfort
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

> Treatment plan simplification refers to changing strategy to decrease the complexity of a medication plan (e.g., fewer administration times and fewer blood glucose checks) and decreasing the need for calculations (such as sliding-scale insulin calculations or insulin-carbohydrate ratio calculations). Deintensification/deprescribing refers to decreasing the dose or frequency of administration of a treatment or discontinuing a treatment altogether. ADL, activities of daily living; PALTC, post-acute and long-term care. Created using information from Munshi et al. 2016 (151) and 2017 (194).

2025  December 10 on guest by http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S277/848834/dc26s013.pdf Downloaded from



---


diabetesjournals.org/care     Older  Adults  S291

# TREATMENT IN POST-ACUTE AND LONG-TERM CARE SETTINGS

> **Recommendations**  
> **13.16** Recommend diabetes education/training (including that for CGM devices, insulin pumps, and advanced insulin delivery systems) for the staff of post-acute and long-term care settings to improve the management of older adults with diabetes. **E**  
> **13.17** People with diabetes residing in post-acute and long-term care settings need careful assessment of mobility, mentation, medications, and management preferences to establish individualized glycemic goals and to make appropriate choices of glucose-lowering agents and devices (including CGM devices, insulin pumps, and advanced insulin delivery systems) based on their clinical and functional status. **E**

Management of diabetes in the PALTC setting has multiple unique and nuanced considerations. Individualization of health care is important for all people with diabetes; however, practical guidance for feasible and sustainable care delivery is needed for health care professionals, PALTC staff, and care partners (163,164). Training should include diabetes detection, identification of complications, glycemic monitoring, determination of individualized glycemic goals, medication and nutritional considerations, oral care and regular foot assessment, wound and infection concerns, and institutional quality assessment. PALTC facilities should develop their own policies and procedures for prevention, recognition, and management of hypoglycemia and symptomatic hyperglycemia. For more information, see the ADA position statement “Management of Diabetes in Long-term Care and Skilled Nursing Facilities” and diabetes management guidelines for the PALTC setting (153,163,164). With the increased longevity of populations, the care of people with diabetes and its complications in PALTC is an area that warrants greater study.

## Nutritional Considerations

An older adult residing in a PALTC facility may have irregular and unpredictable meal consumption, undernutrition, diminished appetite, and impaired swallowing. Furthermore, therapeutic nutrition plans or modified food consistencies may inadvertently lead to decreased food intake and contribute to unintentional weight loss and undernutrition. Meals tailored to a person’s culture, preferences, and personal goals may increase quality of life, satisfaction with meals, and nutrition status (165). It may be helpful to give insulin immediately after meals to ensure that the dose is appropriate for the amount of carbohydrate the individual consumed in the meal. However, postprandial insulin administration needs to be balanced against the potential for hypoglycemia, ensuring that prandial insulin is rapid-acting (not short-acting) and is given as soon as possible after eating. It is similarly important that insulin not be given too early before meals and that preprandial glucose monitoring, insulin administration, and eating occur as close to each other as possible.

## Hypoglycemia

Older adults with diabetes in PALTC are especially vulnerable to hypoglycemia. They have a disproportionately high number of health conditions that can increase hypoglycemia risk: impaired cognitive and renal function, slowed hormonal regulation and counter-regulation, suboptimal hydration, variable appetite and nutritional intake, requirement for feeding assistance, polypharmacy, and slowed intestinal absorption (166). Oral agents may achieve glycemic outcomes similar to those for basal insulin in PALTC residents with type 2 diabetes (109,167). CGM may be a useful approach to monitoring for and preventing hypoglycemia among individuals treated with insulin in PALTC (160,161,168).

Another consideration for the PALTC setting is that unlike in the hospital setting, health care professionals are not required to evaluate individuals daily. According to federal guidelines, at a minimum, assessments should be done at least every 30 days for the first 90 days after admission and then at least once every 60 days and as clinically indicated for acute medical problems or worsening of existing conditions. Although in practice some individuals may be seen more frequently, individuals may have poorly managed glucose levels or wide excursions without the practitioner being notified. Health care professionals may adjust treatment plans by telephone, fax, or in person directly at the PALTC facilities, provided they are given timely notification of blood glucose management issues from a standardized alert system. It is important for individuals with significant and/or persistent dysglycemia to be reassessed and their treatment modified without delay to prevent recurrence of hypoglycemia and significant hyperglycemia.

The following alert strategy could be considered:

1. Call a health care professional immediately in cases of low blood glucose levels (<70 mg/dL [<3.9 mmol/L]). However, treatment of hypoglycemia should not be delayed.  
2. Call as soon as possible when  
   - a. glucose values are 70–100 mg/dL (3.9–5.6 mmol/L) (treatment plan may need to be adjusted),  
   - b. two or more blood glucose values >250 mg/dL (>13.9 mmol/L) are observed within a 24-h period accompanied by a significant change in clinical status,  
   - c. glucose values are consistently >250 mg/dL (>13.9 mmol/L) within a 24-h period,  
   - d. glucose values are consistently >300 mg/dL (>16.7 mmol/L) over 2 consecutive days,  
   - e. any reading is too high for the glucose monitoring device, or  
   - f. the individual is sick, with symptomatic hyperglycemia, vomiting, fever, lethargy, or poor oral intake.

# END-OF-LIFE CARE

> **Recommendations**  
> **13.18** When palliative care is needed in older adults with diabetes, health care professionals should discuss goals and intensity of care with people with diabetes and their care partners. Strict glucose, blood pressure, and lipid management are not necessary; consider deintensification or simplification of medication plans and prioritize symptom management. **E**  
> **13.19** Prioritize the overall comfort, prevention of distressing symptoms, and preservation of quality of life and dignity as primary goals for diabetes management at the end of life. **C**

2025  December 10 on guest by http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S277/848834/dc26s013.pdf Downloaded from


---



S292  Older  Adults     Diabetes Care Volume  49,  Supplement  1,  January  2026

Management of diabetes in the setting of palliative medicine or hospice care at the end of life is a unique situation. The goal of palliative medicine is to promote comfort, symptom management and prevention (pain, hypoglycemia, hyperglycemia, and dehydration), and preservation of dignity and quality of life in the setting of limited life expectancy (169,170).

In the setting of palliative care, health care professionals should initiate conversations with people with diabetes and their care partners regarding the goals and intensity of diabetes care; strict glucose and blood pressure management may not be consistent with achieving comfort and quality of life. Avoidance of severe hypertension and hyperglycemia aligns with the goals of palliative care. In a multicenter trial, withdrawal of statins among people with diabetes in palliative care was found to improve quality of life (171–173). The evidence for the safety and efficacy of deintensification protocols in older adults is growing for both glucose and blood pressure management (113,174) and is clearly relevant for palliative care. An individual has the right to refuse testing and treatment, whereas health care professionals may consider withdrawing treatment and limiting diagnostic testing, including a reduction in the frequency of blood glucose monitoring (175,176). CGM could be considered when frequent blood glucose monitoring is burdensome but monitoring for hypoglycemia and hyperglycemia is needed. Glycemic goals should aim to prevent hypoglycemia (blood glucose <70 mg/dL) and severe hyperglycemia (blood glucose >250 mg/dL when symptom burden increases), although individuals vary in their response (177). Treatment interventions need to be mindful of quality of life. Careful monitoring of oral intake is warranted. The clinical decision-making process may need to involve the individual, family, and care partners, leading to a care plan that is safe, effective, and goal-concordant (178). Pharmacologic therapy for type 2 diabetes may include oral agents with low likelihood of causing hypoglycemia as first line, followed by a simplified insulin plan such as basal insulin. Agents that can cause gastrointestinal and other adverse symptoms may not be good choices in this setting. As symptoms progress, some agents may be slowly tapered and discontinued.

Different categories have been proposed for diabetes management in those at the end of life (77).

1. A stable individual: Continue with the person’s previous medication plan, with a focus on  
   1) the prevention of hypoglycemia and  
   2) the management of hyperglycemia using blood glucose monitoring, keeping levels below the renal threshold of glucose, and hyperglycemia-mediated dehydration. There is no role for A1C monitoring.

2. An individual with organ failure: Preventing hypoglycemia is of greatest significance. Dehydration must be prevented and treated. In people with type 1 diabetes, insulin administration may be reduced as the oral intake of food decreases but should not be stopped. For those with type 2 diabetes, agents that may cause hypoglycemia should be reduced in dose. The main goal is to avoid hypoglycemia, allowing for glucose values in the upper level of the desired goal range.

3. A dying individual: For people with type 2 diabetes, the discontinuation of all medications may be a reasonable approach, as these individuals are unlikely to have any oral intake. In people with type 1 diabetes, there is no consensus, but a small amount of basal insulin may maintain glucose levels and prevent acute hyperglycemic complications and symptom burden.

Diabetes health care professionals are well positioned to support people with diabetes in advance care planning. Health care professionals can assist people with diabetes in clarifying and documenting their values, preferences, and goals for care in an advanced care plan (172). Advance care plans are guides to help health care professionals and care partners make difficult treatment decisions when the person with diabetes is no longer able to make decisions for themselves. Research shows that people with diabetes want to discuss end-of-life care plans with their health care professional (179). Two validated tools exist to support health care professionals in this process: the Supportive and Palliative Care Indicators Tool (180) and the Gold Standards Framework Proactive Identification Guidance (181).

In conclusion, the management of diabetes in older adults at the end of life necessitates a person-centered approach that prioritizes attainment of individualized treatment goals, comfort, symptom management, quality of life, and the preservation of dignity.

## References

1. Laiteerapong N, Huang ES. Diabetes in older adults. In *Diabetes in America*, 3rd ed. Cowie CC, Casagrande SS, Menke A, et al., Eds. National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, 2018. Accessed 9 October 2025. Available from https://www.niddk.nih.gov/about-niddk/strategic-plans-reports/diabetes-in-america-3rd-edition  
2. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. National Diabetes Statistics Report, 2024. Accessed 28 August 2025. Available from https://www.cdc.gov/diabetes/php/data-research/index.html  
3. Lin L, Chen P, Zhang Y, et al. Burden of type 2 diabetes mellitus and risk factor attribution among older adults: a global, regional, and national analysis from 1990 to 2021, with projections up to 2040. *Diabetes Obes Metab* 2025;27:4330–4343  
4. Tomic D, Harding JL, Jenkins AJ, Shaw JE, Magliano DJ. The epidemiology of type 1 diabetes mellitus in older adults. *Nat Rev Endocrinol* 2025;21:92–104  
5. Kirkman MS, Briscoe VJ, Clark N, et al. Diabetes in older adults. *Diabetes Care* 2012;35:2650–2664  
6. Young-Hyman D, de Groot M, Hill-Briggs F, Gonzalez JS, Hood K, Peyrot M. Psychosocial care for people with diabetes: a position statement of the American Diabetes Association. *Diabetes Care* 2016;39:2126–2140  
7. Institute of Medicine of the National Academies. Cognitive aging: progress in understanding and opportunities for action. Accessed 28 August 2025. Available from https://nationalacademies.org/hmd/Reports/2015/Cognitive-Aging.aspx  
8. Pilla SJ, Rooney MR, McCoy RG. Disability and diabetes in adults. In *Diabetes in America*. Lawrence JM, Casagrande SS, Herman WH, Wexler DJ, Cefalu WT, Eds. National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, 2023  
9. Sudore RL, Karter AJ, Huang ES, et al. Symptom burden of adults with type 2 diabetes across the disease course: diabetes & aging study. *J Gen Intern Med* 2012;27:1674–1681  
10. Laiteerapong N, Karter AJ, Liu JY, et al. Correlates of quality of life in older adults with diabetes: the diabetes & aging study. *Diabetes Care* 2011;34:1749–1753  
11. Kalyani RR, Golden SH, Cefalu WT. Diabetes and Aging: unique considerations and goals of care. *Diabetes Care* 2017;40:440–443  
12. Cacchione PZ. Age-friendly health systems: the 4Ms framework. *Clin Nurs Res* 2020;29:139–140  
13. McClintock MK, Dale W, Laumann EO, Waite L. Empirical redefinition of comprehensive health and well-being in the older adults of the United States. *Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A* 2016;113:E3071–3080  
14. Laiteerapong N, Iveniuk J, John PM, Laumann EO, Huang ES. Classification of older adults who have diabetes by comorbid conditions,

2025  December 10 on guest by http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S277/848834/dc26s013.pdf Downloaded from



---


diabetesjournals.org/care     Older  Adults  S293

United States, 2005-2006. Prev Chronic Dis 2012;9:E100  
15. Blaum C, Cigolle CT, Boyd C, et al. Clinical complexity in middle-aged and older adults with diabetes: the Health and Retirement Study. Med Care 2010;48:327–334  
16. Tinetti ME, Costello DM, Naik AD, et al. Outcome goals and health care preferences of older adults with multiple chronic conditions. JAMA Netw Open 2021;4:e211271  
17. Xue M, Xu W, Ou Y-N, et al. Diabetes mellitus and risks of cognitive impairment and dementia: a systematic review and meta-analysis of 144 prospective studies. Ageing Res Rev 2019;55:100944  
18. Roberts RO, Knopman DS, Przybelski SA, et al. Association of type 2 diabetes with brain atrophy and cognitive impairment. Neurology 2014;82:1132–1141  
19. Rodríguez-Sánchez B, Angelini V, Feenstra T, Alessie RJM. Diabetes-associated factors as predictors of nursing home admission and costs in the elderly across Europe. J Am Med Dir Assoc 2017;18:74–82  
20. Xu WL, von Strauss E, Qiu CX, Winblad B, Fratiglioni L. Uncontrolled diabetes increases the risk of Alzheimer’s disease: a population-based cohort study. Diabetologia 2009;52:1031–1039  
21. Kciuk M, Kruczkowska W, Gałęziewska J, et al. Alzheimer’s disease as type 3 diabetes: understanding the link and implications. Int J Mol Sci 2024;25:11955  
22. Xiao Y, Hong X, Neelagar R, Mo H. Association between glycated hemoglobin A1c levels, control status, and cognitive function in type 2 diabetes: a prospective cohort study. Sci Rep 2025;15:5011  
23. Huang L, Zhu M, Ji J. Association between hypoglycemia and dementia in patients with diabetes: a systematic review and meta-analysis of 1.4 million patients. Diabetol Metab Syndr 2022;14:31  
24. Livingston G, Huntley J, Sommerlad A, et al. Dementia prevention, intervention, and care: 2020 report of the Lancet Commission. Lancet 2020;396:413–446  
25. Launer LJ, Miller ME, Williamson JD, et al.; ACCORD MIND investigators. Effects of intensive glucose lowering on brain structure and function in people with type 2 diabetes (ACCORD MIND): a randomised open-label substudy. Lancet Neurol 2011;10:969–977  
26. Luchsinger JA, Ma Y, Christophi CA, et al.; Diabetes Prevention Program Research Group. Metformin, lifestyle intervention, and cognition in the Diabetes Prevention Program Outcomes Study. Diabetes Care 2017;40:958–965  
27. Tian S, Jiang J, Wang J, et al. Comparison on cognitive outcomes of antidiabetic agents for type 2 diabetes: a systematic review and network meta-analysis. Diabetes Metab Res Rev 2023;39:e3673  
28. Seminar A, Mulihano A, O’Brien C, et al. Cardioprotective glucose-lowering agents and dementia risk: a systematic review and meta-analysis. JAMA Neurol 2025;82:450–460  
29. National Institute on Aging. Assessing cognitive impairment in older patients. Accessed 28 August 2025. Available from https://www.nia.nih.gov/health/assessing-cognitive-impairment-older-patients  
30. Alzheimer’s Association. Cognitive assessment. Accessed 28 August 2025. Available from https://alz.org/professionals/healthcare-professionals/cognitive-assessment  
31. Borson S, Scanlan JM, Chen P, Ganguli M. The Mini-Cog as a screen for dementia: validation in a population-based sample. J Am Geriatr Soc 2003;51:1451–1454  
32. Folstein MF, Folstein SE, McHugh PR. “Mini-mental state”. A practical method for grading the cognitive state of patients for the clinician. J Psychiatr Res 1975;12:189–198  
33. Nasreddine ZS, Phillips NA, Bédirian V, et al. The Montreal Cognitive Assessment, MoCA: a brief screening tool for mild cognitive impairment. J Am Geriatr Soc 2005;53:695–699  
34. Moreno G, Mangione CM, Kimbro L, Vaisberg E, American Geriatrics Society Expert Panel on Care of Older Adults with Diabetes Mellitus. Guidelines abstracted from the American Geriatrics Society Guidelines for Improving the Care of Older Adults with Diabetes Mellitus: 2013 update. J Am Geriatr Soc 2013;61:2020–2026  
35. American Psychological Association. Guidelines for the evaluation of dementia and age-related cognitive change, 2021. Accessed 28 August 2025. Available from https://www.apa.org/practice/guidelines/dementia.aspx  
36. Lee AK, Lee CJ, Huang ES, Sharrett AR, Coresh J, Selvin E. Risk factors for severe hypoglycemia in black and white adults with diabetes: the Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities (ARIC) study. Diabetes Care 2017;40:1661–1667  
37. Feinkohl I, Aung PP, Keller M, et al.; Edinburgh Type 2 Diabetes Study (ET2DS) Investigators. Severe hypoglycemia and cognitive decline in older people with type 2 diabetes: the Edinburgh Type 2 Diabetes Study. Diabetes Care 2014;37:507–515  
38. Lee AK, Rawlings AM, Lee CJ, et al. Severe hypoglycaemia, mild cognitive impairment, dementia and brain volumes in older adults with type 2 diabetes: the Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities (ARIC) cohort study. Diabetologia 2018;61:1956–1965  
39. Jacobson AM, Ryan CM, Braffett BH, et al.; DCCT/EDIC Research Group. Cognitive performance declines in older adults with type 1 diabetes: results from 32 years of follow-up in the DCCT and EDIC Study. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol 2021;9:436–445  
40. Karter AJ, Warton EM, Lipska KJ, et al. Development and validation of a tool to identify patients with type 2 diabetes at high risk of hypoglycemia-related emergency department or hospital use. JAMA Intern Med 2017;177:1461–1470  
41. Munshi M, Kahkoska AR, Neumiller JJ, et al. Realigning diabetes regimens in older adults: a 4S Pathway to guide simplification and deprescribing strategies. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol 2025;13:427–437  
42. Gerstein HC, Miller ME, Byington RP, et al.; Action to Control Cardiovascular Risk in Diabetes Study Group. Effects of intensive glucose lowering in type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med 2008;358:2545–2559  
43. Duckworth W, Abraira C, Moritz T, et al.; VADT Investigators. Glucose control and vascular complications in veterans with type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med 2009;360:129–139  
44. Carlson AL, Kanapka LG, Miller KM, et al.; WISDM Study Group. Hypoglycemia and glycemic control in older adults with type 1 diabetes: baseline results from the WISDM study. J Diabetes Sci Technol 2021;15:582–592  
45. Pratley RE, Kanapka LG, Rickels MR, et al.; Wireless Innovation for Seniors With Diabetes Mellitus (WISDM) Study Group. Effect of continuous glucose monitoring on hypoglycemia in older adults with type 1 diabetes: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA 2020;323:2397–2406  
46. Miller KM, Kanapka LG, Rickels MR, et al. Benefit of continuous glucose monitoring in reducing hypoglycemia is sustained through 12 months of use among older adults with type 1 diabetes. Diabetes Technol Ther 2022;24:424–434  
47. Gubitosi-Klug RA, Braffett BH, Bebu I, et al. Continuous glucose monitoring in adults with type 1 diabetes with 35 years duration from the DCCT/EDIC study. Diabetes Care 2022;45:659–665  
48. Munshi MN, Slyne C, Adam A, et al. Continuous glucose monitoring with geriatric principles in older adults with type 1 diabetes and hypoglycemia: a randomized controlled trial. Diabetes Care 2025;48:694–702  
49. Ruedy KJ, Parkin CG, Riddlesworth TD, Graham C; DIAMOND Study Group. Continuous glucose monitoring in older adults with type 1 and type 2 diabetes using multiple daily injections of insulin: results from the DIAMOND trial. J Diabetes Sci Technol 2017;11:1138–1146  
50. Bao S, Bailey R, Calhoun P, Beck RW. Effectiveness of continuous glucose monitoring in older adults with type 2 diabetes treated with basal insulin. Diabetes Technol Ther 2022;24:299–306  
51. Tadros M, Sewell H, O’Neal KS. Considerations with using a CGM in older individuals. Sr Care Pharm 2025;40:283–287  
52. McAuley SA, Trawley S, Vogrin S, et al. Closed-loop insulin delivery versus sensor-augmented pump therapy in older adults with type 1 diabetes (ORACL): a randomized, crossover trial. Diabetes Care 2022;45:381–390  
53. Boughton CK, Hartnell S, Thabit H, et al. Hybrid closed-loop glucose control compared with sensor augmented pump therapy in older adults with type 1 diabetes: an open-label multicentre, multinational, randomised, crossover study. Lancet Healthy Longev 2022;3:e135–e142  
54. Reznik Y, Carvalho M, Fendri S, et al. Should people with type 2 diabetes treated by multiple daily insulin injections with home health care support be switched to hybrid closed-loop? The CLOSE AP+ randomized controlled trial. Diabetes Obes Metab 2024;26:622–630  
55. Kudva YC, Henderson RJ, Kanapka LG, et al.; AIDE Study Group. Automated insulin delivery in elderly with type 1 diabetes: a prespecified analysis of the extension phase. Diabetes Technol Ther 2025;27:572–575  
56. Forlenza GP, Carlson AL, Galindo RJ, et al. Real-world evidence supporting tandem control-IQ hybrid closed-loop success in the Medicare and Medicaid type 1 and type 2 diabetes populations. Diabetes Technol Ther 2022;24:814–823  
57. Selvin E, Coresh J, Brancati FL. The burden and treatment of diabetes in elderly individuals in the U.S. Diabetes Care 2006;29:2415–2419  
58. Bandeen-Roche K, Seplaki CL, Huang J, et al. Frailty in older adults: a nationally representative profile in the United States. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci 2015;70:1427–1434  



---



S294  Older  Adults     Diabetes Care Volume  49,  Supplement  1,  January  2026

59. Kalyani RR, Tian J, Xue Q-L, et al. Hyperglycemia and incidence of frailty and lower extremity mobility limitations in older women. J Am Geriatr Soc 2012;60:1701–1707  
60. Pilla SJ, Schoenborn NL, Maruthur NM, Huang ES. Approaches to risk assessment among older patients with diabetes. Curr Diab Rep 2019;19:59  
61. Griffith KN, Prentice JC, Mohr DC, Conlin PR. Predicting 5- and 10-year mortality risk in older adults with diabetes. Diabetes Care 2020;43:1724–1731  
62. Karter AJ, Parker MM, Moffet HH, et al. Development and validation of the Life Expectancy Estimator for Older Adults with Diabetes (LEAD): the diabetes and aging study. J Gen Intern Med 2023;38:2860–2869  
63. Deardorff WJ, Covinsky K. Incorporating prognosis into clinical decision-making for older adults with diabetes. J Gen Intern Med 2023;38:2857–2859  
64. Brown SES, Meltzer DO, Chin MH, Huang ES. Perceptions of quality-of-life effects of treatments for diabetes mellitus in vulnerable and nonvulnerable older patients. J Am Geriatr Soc 2008;56:1183–1190  
65. National Glycohemoglobin Standardization Program. Factors that interfere with HbA1c test results. Accessed 28 August 2025. Available from https://ngsp.org/factors.asp  
66. Parrinello CM, Selvin E. Beyond HbA1c and glucose: the role of nontraditional glycemic markers in diabetes diagnosis, prognosis, and management. Curr Diab Rep 2014;14:548  
67. Selvin E, Rawlings AM, Lutsey PL, et al. Fructosamine and glycated albumin and the risk of cardiovascular outcomes and death. Circulation 2015;132:269–277  
68. Rooney MR, Daya N, Tang O, et al. Glycated albumin and risk of mortality in the US adult population. Clin Chem 2022;68:422–430  
69. Leung V, Wroblewski K, Schumm LP, Huisingh-Scheetz M, Huang ES. Reexamining the classification of older adults with diabetes by comorbidities and exploring relationships with frailty, disability, and 5-year mortality. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci 2021;76:2071–2079  
70. Cigolle CT, Kabeto MU, Lee PG, Blaum CS. Clinical complexity and mortality in middle-aged and older adults with diabetes. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci 2012;67:1313–1320  
71. Le P, Ayers G, Misra-Hebert AD, et al. Adherence to the American Diabetes Association’s glycemic goals in the treatment of diabetes among older americans, 2001–2018. Diabetes Care 2022;45:1107–1115  
72. Huang ES, Zhang Q, Gandra N, Chin MH, Meltzer DO. The effect of comorbid illness and functional status on the expected benefits of intensive glucose control in older patients with type 2 diabetes: a decision analysis. Ann Intern Med 2008;149:11–19  
73. Huang ES, Laiteerapong N, Liu JY, John PM, Moffet HH, Karter AJ. Rates of complications and mortality in older patients with diabetes mellitus: the diabetes and aging study. JAMA Intern Med 2014;174:251–258  
74. Lipska KJ, Gilliam LK, Lee C, et al. Risk of infection in older adults with type 2 diabetes with relaxed glycemic control. Diabetes Care 2024;47:2258–2265  

75. Huang ES, Liu JY, Lipska KJ, et al. Data-driven classification of health status of older adults with diabetes: the diabetes and aging study. J Am Geriatr Soc 2023;71:2120–2130  
76. Rooney MR, Tang O, Echouffo Tcheugui JB, et al. American Diabetes Association framework for glycemic control in older adults: implications for risk of hospitalization and mortality. Diabetes Care 2021;44:1524–1531  
77. Sinclair A, Dunning T, Colagiuri S. *International Diabetes Federation (IDF) Global Guideline for Managing Older People with Type 2 Diabetes.* International Diabetes Federation, 2013  
78. Angelo M, Ruchalski C, Sproge BJ. An approach to diabetes mellitus in hospice and palliative medicine. J Palliat Med 2011;14:83–87  
79. Beckett NS, Peters R, Fletcher AE, et al.; HYVET Study Group. Treatment of hypertension in patients 80 years of age or older. N Engl J Med 2008;358:1887–1898  
80. de Boer IH, Bangalore S, Benetos A, et al. Diabetes and hypertension: a position statement by the American Diabetes Association. Diabetes Care 2017;40:1273–1284  
81. Bi Y, Li M, Liu Y, et al.; BPROAD Research Group. Intensive blood-pressure control in patients with type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med 2025;392:1155–1167  
82. Gencer B, Marston NA, Im K, et al. Efficacy and safety of lowering LDL cholesterol in older patients: a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials. Lancet 2020;396:1637–1643  
83. Yourman LC, Cenzer IS, Boscardin WJ, et al. Evaluation of time to benefit of statins for the primary prevention of cardiovascular events in adults aged 50 to 75 years: a meta-analysis. JAMA Intern Med 2021;181:179–185  
84. Feng L, Gao Q, Hu K, et al. Prevalence and risk factors of sarcopenia in patients with diabetes: a meta-analysis. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2022;107:1470–1483  
85. Li M, Sun H, Chen H, Ma W, Li Y. Type 2 diabetes and bone mineral density: a meta-analysis and systematic review. Medicine (Baltimore) 2024;103:e40468  
86. U.S. Department of Agriculture and U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. *Dietary Guidelines for Americans, 2020–2025.* 9th ed. Accessed 28 August 2025. Available from https://www.dietaryguidelines.gov/sites/default/files/2021-03/Dietary_Guidelines_for_Americans-2020–2025.pdf  
87. Lesser LI. In adults at CV risk, Mediterranean-style or low-fat dietary programs vs. minimal interventions reduce all-cause mortality. Ann Intern Med 2023;176:Jc78  
88. Ley SH, Hamdy O, Mohan V, Hu FB. Prevention and management of type 2 diabetes: dietary components and nutritional strategies. Lancet 2014;383:1999–2007  
89. Whaikid P, Piaseu N. The effectiveness of protein supplementation combined with resistance exercise programs among community-dwelling older adults with sarcopenia: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Epidemiol Health 2024;46:e2024030  
90. Tao J, Ke Y-Y, Zhang Z, et al. Comparison of the value of malnutrition and sarcopenia for predicting mortality in hospitalized old adults over 80 years. Exp Gerontol 2020;138:111007  

91. Beaudart C, Sanchez-Rodriguez D, Locquet M, Reginster J-Y, Lengelé L, Bruyere O. Malnutrition as a strong predictor of the onset of sarcopenia. Nutrients 2019;11:2883  
92. Liu G-X, Chen Y, Yang Y-X, et al. Pilot study of the Mini Nutritional Assessment on predicting outcomes in older adults with type 2 diabetes. Geriatr Gerontol Int 2017;17:2485–2492  
93. Malara A, Sgro G, Caruso C, et al. Relationship between cognitive impairment and nutritional assessment on functional status in Calabrian long-term-care. Clin Interv Aging 2014;9:105–110  
94. Alfonso-Rosa RM, Del Pozo-Cruz B, Del Pozo-Cruz J, Del Pozo-Cruz JT, Sanudo B. The relationship between nutritional status, functional capacity, and health-related quality of life in older adults with type 2 diabetes: a pilot explanatory study. J Nutr Health Aging 2013;17:315–321  
95. Pahor M, Guralnik JM, Ambrosius WT, et al.; LIFE study investigators. Effect of structured physical activity on prevention of major mobility disability in older adults: the LIFE study randomized clinical trial. JAMA 2014;311:2387–2396  
96. Bray G, Gregg E, Haffner S, et al.; Look AHEAD Research Group. Baseline characteristics of the randomised cohort from the Look AHEAD (Action for Health in Diabetes) study. Diab Vasc Dis Res 2006;3:202–215  
97. Curtis JM, Horton ES, Bahnson J, et al.; Look AHEAD Research Group. Prevalence and predictors of abnormal cardiovascular responses to exercise testing among individuals with type 2 diabetes: the Look AHEAD (Action for Health in Diabetes) study. Diabetes Care 2010;33:901–907  
98. Wing RR, Bolin P, Brancati FL, et al.; Look AHEAD Research Group. Cardiovascular effects of intensive lifestyle intervention in type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med 2013;369:145–154  
99. Gregg E, Jakicic J, Blackburn G, et al.; Look AHEAD Research Group. Association of the magnitude of weight loss and changes in physical fitness with long-term cardiovascular disease outcomes in overweight or obese people with type 2 diabetes: a post-hoc analysis of the Look AHEAD randomised clinical trial. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol 2016;4:913–921  
100. Gregg EW, Chen H, Wagenknecht LE, et al.; Look AHEAD Research Group. Association of an intensive lifestyle intervention with remission of type 2 diabetes. JAMA 2012;308:2489–2496  
101. Rejeski WJ, Bray GA, Chen S-H, et al.; Look AHEAD Research Group. Aging and physical function in type 2 diabetes: 8 years of an intensive lifestyle intervention. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci 2015;70:345–353  
102. Espeland MA, Rejeski WJ, West DS, et al.; Action for Health in Diabetes Research Group. Intensive weight loss intervention in older individuals: results from the Action for Health in Diabetes Type 2 diabetes mellitus trial. J Am Geriatr Soc 2013;61:912–922  
103. Houston DK, Neiberg RH, Miller ME, et al. Physical function following a long-term lifestyle intervention among middle aged and older adults with type 2 diabetes: the Look AHEAD study. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci 2018;73:1552–1559  
104. Simpson FR, Pajewski NM, Nicklas B, et al.; Indices for Accelerated Aging in Obesity and Diabetes Ancillary Study of the Action for Health in Diabetes (Look AHEAD) Trial. Impact of multidomain lifestyle intervention on frailty through the lens of deficit accumulation in adults with

2025  December  
10 on  guest  
by http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S277/848834/dc26s013.pdf  
from Downloaded  



---


diabetesjournals.org/care     Older  Adults  S295

type  2  diabetes  mellitus.  J  Gerontol  A  Biol  Sci  
Med Sci 2020;75:1921–1927  
105. Espeland  MA,  Gaussoin  SA,  Bahnson  J, et  al. Impact of an 8-year intensive lifestyle intervention on an index of multimorbidity. J Am Geriatr Soc 2020;68:2249–2256  
106. Gregg EW, Lin J, Bardenheier B, et al.; Look AHEAD Study Group. Impact of intensive lifestyle intervention on disability-free life expectancy: the Look AHEAD study. Diabetes Care 2018;41:1040–1048  
107. Park J, Zhang P, Wang Y, Zhou X, Look KA, Bigman ET. High out-of-pocket health care cost burden among Medicare beneficiaries with diabetes, 1999–2017. Diabetes Care 2021;44:1797–1804  
108. Patel MR, Resnicow K, Lang I, Kraus K, Heisler M. Solutions to address diabetes-related financial burden and cost-related nonadherence: results from a pilot study. Health Educ Behav 2018;45:101–111  
109. Arnold SV, Lipska KJ, Wang J, Seman L, Mehta SN, Kosiborod M. Use of intensive glycemic management in older adults with diabetes mellitus. J Am Geriatr Soc 2018;66:1190–1194  
110. Andreassen LM, Sandberg S, Kristensen GBB, Sølvik UØ, Kjome RLS. Nursing home patients with diabetes: prevalence, drug treatment and glycemic control. Diabetes Res Clin Pract 2014;105:102–109  
111. Lipska KJ, Ross JS, Miao Y, Shah ND, Lee SJ, Steinman MA. Potential overtreatment of diabetes mellitus in older adults with tight glycemic control. JAMA Intern Med 2015;175:356–362  
112. Thorpe CT, Gellad WF, Good CB, et al. Tight glycemic control and use of hypoglycemic medications in older veterans with type 2 diabetes and comorbid dementia. Diabetes Care 2015;38:588–595  
113. McAlister FA, Youngson E, Eurich DT. Treatment deintensification is uncommon in adults with type 2 diabetes mellitus: a retrospective cohort study. Circ Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes 2017;10:e003514  
114. Seidu S, Kunutsor SK, Topsever P, Hambling CE, Cos FX, Khunti K. Deintensification in older patients with type 2 diabetes: a systematic review of approaches, rates and outcomes. Diabetes Obes Metab 2019;21:1668–1679  
115. Weiner JZ, Gopalan A, Mishra P, et al. Use and discontinuation of insulin treatment among adults aged 75 to 79 years with type 2 diabetes. JAMA Intern Med 2019;179:1633–1641  
116. Orloff J, Min JY, Mushlin A, Flory J. Safety and effectiveness of metformin in patients with reduced renal function: a systematic review. Diabetes Obes Metab 2021;23:2035–2047  
117. Aroda VR, Edelstein SL, Goldberg RB, et al.; Diabetes Prevention Program Research Group. Long-term metformin use and vitamin B12 deficiency in the Diabetes Prevention Program Outcomes Study. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2016;101:1754–1761  
118. Schwartz AV, Chen H, Ambrosius WT, et al. Effects of TZD use and discontinuation on fracture rates in ACCORD bone study. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2015;100:4059–4066  
119. Billington EO, Grey A, Bolland MJ. The effect of thiazolidinediones on bone mineral density and bone turnover: systematic review and meta-analysis. Diabetologia 2015;58:2238–2246  
120. Zhou Y, Huang Y, Ji X, Wang X, Shen L, Wang Y. Pioglitazone for the primary and secondary prevention of cardiovascular and renal outcomes in patients with or at high risk of type 2 diabetes mellitus: a meta-analysis. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2020;105:dgz252  
121. Tramontana F, Napoli N, Litwack-Harrison S, et al. More rapid bone mineral density loss in older men with diabetes: the Osteoporotic Fractures in Men (MrOS) study. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2024;109:e2283–e2290  
122. Napoli N, Strotmeyer ES, Ensrud KE, et al. Fracture risk in diabetic elderly men: the MrOS study. Diabetologia 2014;57:2057–2065  
123. Zhang Y-S, Zheng Y-D, Yuan Y, Chen S-C, Xie B-C. Effects of anti-diabetic drugs on fracture risk: a systematic review and network meta-analysis. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne) 2021;12:735824  
124. Wang B, Wang Z, Poundarik AA, et al. Unmasking fracture risk in type 2 diabetes: the association of longitudinal glycemic hemoglobin level and medications. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2022;107:e1390–e1401  
125. Turchin A, Petito LC, Hegermiller E, et al. Cardiovascular events in individuals treated with sulfonylureas or dipeptidyl peptidase 4 inhibitors. JAMA Netw Open 2025;8:e2523067  
126. American Geriatrics Society 2015 Beers Criteria Update Expert Panel. American Geriatrics Society 2015 updated Beers Criteria for potentially inappropriate medication use in older adults. J Am Geriatr Soc 2015;63:2227–2246  
127. Parekh TM, Raji M, Lin Y-L, Tan A, Kuo Y-F, Goodwin JS. Hypoglycemia after antimicrobial drug prescription for older patients using sulfonylureas. JAMA Intern Med 2014;174:1605–1612  
128. Lee S, Ock M, Kim H-S, Kim H. Effects of co-administration of sulfonylureas and antimicrobial drugs on hypoglycemia in patients with type 2 diabetes using a case-crossover design. Pharmacotherapy 2020;40:902–912  
129. Pilla SJ, Pitts SI, Maruthur NM. High concurrent use of sulfonylureas and antimicrobials with drug interactions causing hypoglycemia. J Patient Saf 2022;18:e217–e224  
130. Bilal A, Yi F, Gonzalez GR, et al. Effects of newer anti-hyperglycemic agents on cardiovascular outcomes in older adults: systematic review and meta-analysis. J Diabetes Complications 2024;38:108783  
131. Karagiannis T, Tsapas A, Athanasiadou E, et al. GLP-1 receptor agonists and SGLT2 inhibitors for older people with type 2 diabetes: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Diabetes Res Clin Pract 2021;174:108737  
132. Malhotra A, Grunstein RR, Fietze I, et al.; SURMOUNT-OSA Investigators. Tirzepatide for the treatment of obstructive sleep apnea and obesity. N Engl J Med 2024;391:1193–1205  
133. Bliddal H, Bays H, Czernichow S, et al.; STEP 9 Study Group. Once-weekly semaglutide in persons with obesity and knee osteoarthritis. N Engl J Med 2024;391:1573–1583  
134. Loomba R, Hartman ML, Lawitz EJ, et al.; SYNERGY-NASH Investigators. Tirzepatide for metabolic dysfunction-associated steatohepatitis with liver fibrosis. N Engl J Med 2024;391:299–310  
135. Sanyal AJ, Newsome PN, Kliers I, et al.; ESSENCE Study Group. Phase 3 trial of semaglutide in metabolic dysfunction-associated steatohepatitis. N Engl J Med 2025;392:2089–2099  
136. Newsome PN, Buchholtz K, Cusi K, et al.; NN9931-4296 Investigators. A placebo-controlled trial of subcutaneous semaglutide in nonalcoholic steatohepatitis. N Engl J Med 2021;384:1113–1124  
137. Husain M, Birkenfeld AL, Donsmark M, et al.; PIONEER 6 Investigators. Oral semaglutide and cardiovascular outcomes in patients with type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med 2019;381:841–851  
138. Davies MJ, D’Alessio DA, Fradkin J, et al. Management of hyperglycemia in type 2 diabetes, 2018. A consensus report by the American Diabetes Association (ADA) and the European Association for the Study of Diabetes (EASD). Diabetes Care 2018;41:2669–2701  
139. Zinman B, Wanner C, Lachin JM, et al.; EMPA-REG OUTCOME Investigators. Empagliflozin, cardiovascular outcomes, and mortality in type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med 2015;373:2117–2128  
140. Neal B, Perkovic V, Mahaffey KW, et al.; CANVAS Program Collaborative Group. Canagliflozin and cardiovascular and renal events in type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med 2017;377:644–657  
141. Wiviott SD, Raz I, Bonaca MP, et al.; DECLARE–TIMI 58 Investigators. Dapagliflozin and cardiovascular outcomes in type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med 2019;380:347–357  
142. Lunati ME, Cimino V, Gandolfi A, et al. SGLT2-inhibitors are effective and safe in the elderly: the SOLD study. Pharmacol Res 2022;183:106396  
143. Scheen AJ, Bonnet F. Efficacy and safety profile of SGLT2 inhibitors in the elderly: how is the benefit/risk balance? Diabetes Metab 2023;49:101419  
144. Lin DS-H, Lee J-K, Chen W-J. Clinical adverse events associated with sodium-glucose cotransporter 2 inhibitors: a meta-analysis involving 10 randomized clinical trials and 71 553 individuals. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2021;106:2133–2145  
145. Krepostman N, Kramer H. Lower urinary tract symptoms should be queried when initiating sodium glucose co-transporter 2 inhibitors. Kidney360 2021;2:751–754  
146. Lee AK, Lipska KJ, Callahan KE, Raphael E, Lee SJ. Urinary incontinence in US adults aged ≥55 years with type 2 diabetes and indications for SGLT2is: NHANES 2013–2020. BMJ Open Diabetes Res Care 2025;13:e004929  
147. Ata F, Yousaf Z, Khan AA, et al. SGLT-2 inhibitors associated euglycemic and hyperglycemic DKA in a multicentric cohort. Sci Rep 2021;11:10293  
148. Bradley MC, Chillarige Y, Lee H, et al. Severe hypoglycemia risk with long-acting insulin analogs vs neutral protamine Hagedorn insulin. JAMA Intern Med 2021;181:598–607  
149. Abdelhafiz AH, Sinclair AJ. Deintensification of hypoglycaemic medications-use of a systematic review approach to highlight safety concerns in older people with type 2 diabetes. J Diabetes Complications 2018;32:444–450  
150. Sussman JB, Kerr EA, Saini SD, et al. Rates of deintensification of blood pressure and glycemic medication treatment based on levels of control and life expectancy in older patients with diabetes mellitus. JAMA Intern Med 2015;175:1942–1949  
151. Munshi MN, Slyne C, Segal AR, Saul N, Lyons C, Weinger K. Simplification of insulin regimen in older adults and risk of hypoglycemia. JAMA Intern Med 2016;176:1023–1025  
152. Jude EB, Malecki MT, Gomez Huelgas R, et al. Expert panel guidance and narrative review



---



S296  Older  Adults     Diabetes Care Volume  49,  Supplement  1,  January  2026

of  treatment  simplification  of  complex  insulin regimens to improve outcomes in type 2 diabetes.  
Diabetes Ther 2022;13:619–634  

153. Davidson HE, Jain S, Kazdan C, Resnick B, Scarabelli T, Pandya N. Clinical practice guideline for diabetes management in the post-acute and long-term care setting. J Am Med Dir Assoc 2024; 25:105342  
154. Livingstone SJ, Levin D, Looker HC, et al.; Scottish Renal Registry. Estimated life expectancy in a Scottish cohort with type 1 diabetes, 2008-2010. JAMA 2015;313:37–44  
155. Miller RG, Secrest AM, Sharma RK, Songer TJ, Orchard TJ. Improvements in the life expectancy of type 1 diabetes: the Pittsburgh Epidemiology of Diabetes Complications study cohort. Diabetes 2012;61:2987–2992  
156. Bullard KM, Cowie CC, Lessem SE, et al. Prevalence of diagnosed diabetes in adults by diabetes type - United States, 2016. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2018;67:359–361  
157. Heise T, Nosek L, Rønn BB, et al. Lower within-subject variability of insulin detemir in comparison to NPH insulin and insulin glargine in people with type 1 diabetes. Diabetes 2004;53:1614–1620  
158. Larsen AB, Hermann M, Graue M. Continuous glucose monitoring in older people with diabetes receiving home care-a feasibility study. Pilot Feasibility Stud 2021;7:12  
159. Fløde M, Hermann M, Haugstvedt A, et al. High number of hypoglycaemic episodes identified by CGM among home-dwelling older people with diabetes: an observational study in Norway. BMC Endocr Disord 2023;23:218  
160. Bouillet B, Tscherter P, Vaillard L, et al. Frequent and severe hypoglycaemia detected with continuous glucose monitoring in older institutionalised patients with diabetes. Age Ageing 2021;50:2088–2093  
161. Munshi MN, Slyne C, Adam A, et al. Excessive burden of hyperglycemia along with hypoglycemia in long-term care facilities identified by continuous glucose monitoring. J Am Med Dir Assoc 2025;26:105590  
162. Idrees T, Castro-Revoredo IA, Oh HD, et al. Continuous glucose monitoring-guided insulin administration in long-term care facilities: a randomized clinical trial. J Am Med Dir Assoc 2024;25:884–888  
163. Munshi MN, Florez H, Huang ES, et al. Management of diabetes in long-term care and skilled nursing facilities: a position statement of the American Diabetes Association. Diabetes Care 2016;39:308–318  
164. Sloane PD, Pandya N. Individualizing diabetes care in older persons with multimorbidity. J Am Med Dir Assoc 2021;22:1884–1888  
165. Dorner B, Friedrich EK, Posthauer ME. Practice paper of the American Dietetic Association: individualized nutrition approaches for older adults in health care communities. J Am Diet Assoc 2010;110:1554–1563  
166. Migdal A, Yarandi SS, Smiley D, Umpierrez GE. Update on diabetes in the elderly and in nursing home residents. J Am Med Dir Assoc 2011;12:627–632.e2  
167. Pasquel FJ, Powell W, Peng L, et al. A randomized controlled trial comparing treatment with oral agents and basal insulin in elderly patients with type 2 diabetes in long-term care facilities. BMJ Open Diabetes Res Care 2015;3:e000104  
168. Gomez-Peralta F, Abreu C, Santos E, et al. A telehealth program using continuous glucose monitoring and a connected insulin pen cap in nursing homes for older adults with insulin-treated diabetes: the Trescasas study. Diabetes Technol Ther 2025;27:357–365  
169. Sinclair A, Morley JE, Rodriguez-Mañas L, et al. Diabetes mellitus in older people: position statement on behalf of the International Association of Gerontology and Geriatrics (IAGG), the European Diabetes Working Party for Older People (EDWPOP), and the International Task Force of Experts in Diabetes. J Am Med Dir Assoc 2012;13:497–502  
170. Sharma A, Sikora L, Bush SH. Management of diabetes mellitus in adults at the end of life: a review of recent literature and guidelines. J Palliat Med 2019;22:1133–1138  
171. Kutner JS, Blatchford PJ, Taylor DH, Jr, et al. Safety and benefit of discontinuing statin therapy in the setting of advanced, life-limiting illness: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA Intern Med 2015; 175:691–700  
172. Dunning T, Martin P. Palliative and end of life care of people with diabetes: issues, challenges and strategies. Diabetes Res Clin Pract 2018;143:454–463  
173. Bouça-Machado R, Rosário M, Alarcão J, Correia-Guedes L, Abreu D, Ferreira JJ. Clinical trials in palliative care: a systematic review of their methodological characteristics and of the quality of their reporting. BMC Palliat Care 2017; 16:10  
174. Sheppard JP, Burt J, Lown M, et al.; OPTIMISE Investigators. Effect of antihypertensive medication reduction vs usual care on short-term blood pressure control in patients with hypertension aged 80 years and older: the OPTIMISE randomized clinical trial. JAMA 2020;323:2039–2051  
175. Ford-Dunn S, Smith A, Quin J. Management of diabetes during the last days of life: attitudes of consultant diabetologists and consultant palliative care physicians in the UK. Palliat Med 2006;20:197–203  
176. Petrillo LA, Gan S, Jing B, Lang-Brown S, Boscardin WJ, Lee SJ. Hypoglycemia in hospice patients with type 2 diabetes in a national sample of nursing homes. JAMA Intern Med 2018;178:713–715  
177. DePew R, Hershman T, Giles M, Rosa WE, Curseen K. Top ten tips palliative care clinicians should know about managing diabetes at end-of-life. J Palliat Med 2025:10.1089/jpm.2025.0226  
178. Mallery LH, Ransom T, Steeves B, Cook B, Dunbar P, Moorhouse P. Evidence-informed guidelines for treating frail older adults with type 2 diabetes: from the Diabetes Care Program of Nova Scotia (DCPNS) and the Palliative and Therapeutic Harmonization (PATH) program. J Am Med Dir Assoc 2013;14:801–808  
179. Savage S, Duggan N, Dunning T, Martin P. The experiences and care preferences of people with diabetes at the end of life: a qualitative study. Journal of Hospice & Palliative Nursing 2012;14:293–302  
180. University of Edinburgh. SPICT Supportive and Palliative Care Indicators Tool. Accessed 28 August 2025. Available from https://www.spict.org.uk/the-spict  
181. Royal College of General Practitioners. The Gold Standards Framework Proactive Identification Guidance (PIG). Accessed 28 August 2025. Available from https://www.caresearch.com.au/Portals/20/Documents/Health-Professionals/Proactive_Identification_Guidance_v7_(2022).pdf  
182. Bellelli G, Morandi A, Davis DHJ, et al. Validation of the 4AT, a new instrument for rapid delirium screening: a study in 234 hospitalised older people. Age Ageing 2014;43:496–502  
183. Hoyl MT, Alessi CA, Harker JO, et al. Development and testing of a five-item version of the Geriatric Depression Scale. J Am Geriatr Soc 1999;47:873–878  
184. Yesavage JA, Brink TL, Rose TL, et al. Development and validation of a geriatric depression screening scale: a preliminary report. J Psychiatr Res 1982;17:37–49  
185. Stevens JA, Phelan EA. Development of STEADI: a fall prevention resource for health care providers. Health Promot Pract 2013;14:706–714  
186. Rockwood K, Song X, MacKnight C, et al. A global clinical measure of fitness and frailty in elderly people. CMAJ 2005;173:489–495  
187. Kaiser MJ, Bauer JM, Ramsch C, et al.; MNA-International Group. Validation of the Mini Nutritional Assessment short-form (MNA-SF): a practical tool for identification of nutritional status. J Nutr Health Aging 2009;13:782–788  
188. 2023 American Geriatrics Society Beers Criteria Expert Panel. American Geriatrics Society 2023 updated AGS Beers Criteria for potentially inappropriate medication use in older adults. J Am Geriatr Soc 2023;71:2052–2081  
189. Malmstrom TK, Miller DK, Simonsick EM, Ferrucci L, Morley JE. SARC-F: a symptom score to predict persons with sarcopenia at risk for poor functional outcomes. J Cachexia Sarcopenia Muscle 2016;7:28–36  
190. Pirozzo S, Papinczak T, Glasziou P. Whispered voice test for screening for hearing impairment in adults and children: systematic review. BMJ 2003;327:967  
191. Bastien CH, Vallieres A, Morin CM. Validation of the Insomnia Severity Index as an outcome measure for insomnia research. Sleep Med 2001; 2:297–307  
192. Brown JS, Bradley CS, Subak LL, et al.; Diagnostic Aspects of Incontinence Study (DAISy) Research Group. The sensitivity and specificity of a simple test to distinguish between urge and stress urinary incontinence. Ann Intern Med 2006; 144:715–723  
193. Park SW, Goodpaster BH, Strotmeyer ES, et al.; Health, Aging, and Body Composition Study. Accelerated loss of skeletal muscle strength in older adults with type 2 diabetes: the Health, Aging, and Body Composition Study. Diabetes Care 2007;30:1507–1512  
194. Munshi MN, Slyne C, Segal AR, Saul N, Lyons C, Weinger K. Liberating A1C goals in older adults may not protect against the risk of hypoglycemia. J Diabetes Complications 2017;31:1197–1199  

2025  December 10 on guest by http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S277/848834/dc26s013.pdf Downloaded from

