

10. CARDIOVASCULAR DISEASE AND RISK MANAGEMENT  
Diabetes Care Volume 49, Supplement 1, January 2026

# 10. Cardiovascular Disease and Risk Management: Standards of Care in Diabetes—2026  
*Diabetes Care 2026;49(Suppl. 1):S216–S245 | https://doi.org/10.2337/dc26-S010*  

_American Diabetes Association_  
_Professional Practice Committee for Diabetes*_

----

The American Diabetes Association (ADA) “Standards of Care in Diabetes” includes the ADA’s current clinical practice recommendations and is intended to provide the components of diabetes care, general treatment goals and guidelines, and tools to evaluate quality of care. Members of the ADA Professional Practice Committee for Diabetes, an interprofessional expert committee, are responsible for updating the Standards of Care annually, or more frequently as warranted. For a detailed description of ADA standards, statements, and reports, as well as the evidence-grading system for ADA’s clinical practice recommendations and a full list of Professional Practice Committee members, please refer to Introduction and Methodology. Readers who wish to comment on the Standards of Care are invited to do so at professional.diabetes.org/SOC.

_For prevention and management of diabetes complications in children and adolescents, please refer to section 14, “Children and Adolescents.”_

Cardiovascular disease (CVD) is a broad term that includes atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease (ASCVD) and heart failure, two CVDs common among people with diabetes. ASCVD broadly refers to a history of acute coronary syndrome, myocardial infarction (MI), stable or unstable angina or coronary or other arterial revascularization, stroke, or peripheral artery disease (PAD) including aortic aneurysm and is the leading cause of morbidity and mortality in people with diabetes (1). Diabetes itself confers independent ASCVD risk, and among people with diabetes, all major cardiovascular risk factors, including hypertension, hyperlipidemia, and obesity, are clustered and common (2). Numerous studies have shown the efficacy of managing individual cardiovascular risk factors in preventing or slowing ASCVD in people with diabetes. Furthermore, large benefits are seen when multiple cardiovascular risk factors (glycemic, blood pressure, and lipid management) are addressed simultaneously, with evidence for long-lasting benefits (3–5). Notably, most of the evidence supporting interventions to reduce cardiovascular risk in diabetes comes from trials of people with type 2 diabetes. No randomized trials have been specifically designed to assess the impact of cardiovascular risk reduction strategies in people with type 1 diabetes. Therefore, the recommendations for cardiovascular risk factor modification for people with type 1 diabetes are extrapolated from data obtained in people with type 2 diabetes and are similar to those for people with type 2 diabetes.

Under the current paradigm of comprehensive risk factor modification, cardiovascular morbidity and mortality have notably decreased in people with both type 1 and type 2 diabetes (1). Indeed, when all major cardiovascular risk factors are treated to within the target ranges, people with type 2 diabetes have risk of death, MI, or stroke similar to that of the general population (6). Despite these encouraging opportunities to reduce morbidity and mortality, only a minority of people with

----

> *A complete list of members of the American Diabetes Association Professional Practice Committee for Diabetes can be found at https://doi.org/10.2337/dc26-SINT.*  
> This section has received endorsement from the American College of Cardiology.  
> Duality of interest information for each contributor is available at https://doi.org/10.2337/dc26-SDIS.  
> Suggested citation: American Diabetes Association Professional Practice Committee for Diabetes. 10. Cardiovascular disease and risk management: Standards of Care in Diabetes—2026. Diabetes Care 2026;49(Suppl. 1):S216–S245  
> © 2025 by the American Diabetes Association. Readers may use this work for educational, noncommercial purposes if properly cited and unaltered. The version of record may be linked at https://diabetesjournals.org/care, but ADA permission is required to post this work on any third-party site or platform. This publication and its contents may not be reproduced, distributed, or used for text or data mining, machine learning, or similar technologies without prior written permission. Requests to reuse, adapt, or distribute this work may be sent to permissions@diabetes.org. More information is available at https://diabetesjournals.org/journals/pages/license.



---


diabetesjournals.org/care     Cardiovascular  Disease  and  Risk  Management  S217

type 2 diabetes achieve recommended risk factor goals and are treated with guideline-recommended therapy (7–9). Therefore, continued focus on delivering high-quality comprehensive cardiovascular care and on addressing barriers to risk factor management are required to implement the treatment recommendations (1,10) outlined in this section.

CVD also includes heart failure, and diabetes is a risk factor for incident heart failure, which is at least twofold more prevalent in people with diabetes compared with those without diabetes and is a major cause of morbidity and mortality (11). People with diabetes may present with a wide spectrum of heart failure, including heart failure with preserved ejection fraction (HFpEF), heart failure with mildly reduced ejection fraction (HFmrEF), or heart failure with reduced ejection fraction (HFrEF) (12,13). Comorbid conditions including overweight and obesity and hypertension often precede the development of HFpEF and have been implicated in the pathophysiology of HFpEF (14). Coronary artery disease is a major risk factor and a cause of myocardial injury in ischemic heart disease leading to HFrEF. In addition, people with diabetes are at risk for developing structural heart disease and HFrEF in the absence of obstructive coronary artery disease (15). The pathophysiology of heart failure in people with diabetes and further details of screening, diagnosis, and treatment of people with heart failure and diabetes are also outlined in a previous consensus statement by the American Diabetes Association (ADA) (16).

There is an increasing appreciation of the common pathophysiology and interrelationship of cardiometabolic risk factors leading to both adverse cardiovascular and adverse kidney outcomes in people with diabetes, including ASCVD, heart failure, and chronic kidney disease (CKD) (17,18). These three comorbidities are frequently caused by metabolic risk, which is frequently driven by obesity and its associated risk factors, and the incidence of all three conditions rises with increasing A1C levels (19). Collectively, this combination of comorbidities has been termed cardiorenal metabolic disease or cardiovascular-kidney-metabolic health (20–22). Reasons to concurrently consider cardiovascular and kidney comorbidities in the management of people with diabetes include not only the common metabolic risk but also the major benefit observed across the spectrum of CVD, heart failure, and kidney outcomes in people with type 2 diabetes treated with sodium–glucose cotransporter (SGLT) inhibitors or glucagon-like peptide 1 receptor agonists (GLP-1 RAs). Therefore, in addition to the management of hyperglycemia, hypertension, and hyperlipidemia, treatment with SGLT inhibitors and/or GLP-1 RAs that have demonstrated cardiovascular and kidney benefit is considered a fundamental element of risk reduction and a core pharmacological strategy to improve cardiovascular and kidney outcomes in people with type 2 diabetes (**Fig. 10.1**). In addition to the standards of care for the prevention and treatment of CVD outlined below, the reader is referred to section 9, “Pharmacologic Approaches to Glycemic Treatment,” and section 11, “Chronic Kidney Disease and Risk Management,” for a comprehensive review of pharmacological management of hyperglycemia and kidney benefit from SGLT2 inhibitors, SGLT1/2 inhibitors, and GLP-1 RAs.

## HYPERTENSION AND BLOOD PRESSURE MANAGEMENT

An elevated blood pressure is defined as a systolic blood pressure 120–129 mmHg with a diastolic blood pressure <80 mmHg (23). Hypertension is defined as a systolic blood pressure ≥130 mmHg or a diastolic blood pressure ≥80 mmHg (23). This is in agreement with the definition of hypertension by the American College of Cardiology and American Heart Association (23). Hypertension is common among people with type 1 and type 2 diabetes. Hypertension is a major risk factor for ASCVD, heart failure, and microvascular complications. Moreover, numerous studies have shown that antihypertensive therapy reduces ASCVD events, heart failure, and microvascular complications. Please refer to the ADA position statement “Diabetes and Hypertension” for a detailed review of the epidemiology, diagnosis, and treatment of hypertension (24) and hypertension guideline recommendations (25–28). For blood pressure goals and management in individuals with diabetes who are pregnant, see section 15, “Management of Diabetes in Pregnancy” for details.

### Screening and Diagnosis

> **Recommendations**  
> **10.1** Blood pressure should be measured at every routine clinical visit, or at least every 6 months. Individuals found to have elevated blood pressure without a diagnosis of hypertension (systolic blood pressure 120–129 mmHg and diastolic blood pressure <80 mmHg) should have blood pressure confirmed using multiple readings, including measurements on a separate day, to diagnose hypertension. **A** Hypertension is defined as a systolic blood pressure ≥130 mmHg or a diastolic blood pressure ≥80 mmHg based on an average of two or more measurements obtained on two or more occasions. **A** Individuals with blood pressure ≥180/110 mmHg and cardiovascular disease could be diagnosed with hypertension at a single visit. **E**  
> **10.2** Counsel all people with hypertension and diabetes to monitor their blood pressure at home after appropriate education. **A**

Blood pressure should be measured at every routine clinical visit or at least every 6 months by a trained individual who should follow the guidelines established for the general population: measurement in the seated position, with feet on the floor and arm supported at heart level, after 5 min of rest. Cuff size should be appropriate for the upper-arm circumference (29). Individuals identified to have elevated blood pressure or hypertension should have blood pressure confirmed using multiple readings, including measurements on a separate day, to diagnose hypertension. However, in individuals with CVD and blood pressure ≥180/110 mmHg, it is reasonable to diagnose hypertension at a single visit (25). Postural changes in blood pressure and pulse may be evidence of autonomic neuropathy and therefore require adjustment of blood pressure goals. Lying, sitting, and standing blood pressure measurements should be checked on initial visit and as indicated.

Home blood pressure self-monitoring and 24-h ambulatory blood pressure monitoring may provide evidence of white coat hypertension, masked hypertension, or other discrepancies between office and true blood pressure (30,31). In addition to confirming or refuting a diagnosis of hypertension, home blood pressure assessment may be useful to monitor antihypertensive treatment. A systematic review and meta-analysis of prospective

2025  December  
10 on guest by http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S216/848870/dc26s010.pdf Downloaded from


---



Cardiovascular Disease and Risk Management    Diabetes Care Volume 49, Supplement 1, January 2026

# Multifactorial approach to reduction in risk of diabetes complications

Diagram of a building with four pillars supporting a roof labeled "REDUCTION IN DIABETES COMPLICATIONS". The four pillars are labeled: "Glycemic management", "Blood pressure management", "Lipid management", and "Agents with cardiovascular and kidney benefit". The foundation steps are labeled "LIFESTYLE MODIFICATION AND DIABETES EDUCATION".

----

Studies concluded that blood pressure measurements from either 24-h ambulatory or home blood pressure measurements can predict cardiovascular risk (30–32). Moreover, home blood pressure monitoring may improve medication-taking behavior and thus help reduce cardiovascular risk (33).

## Treatment Goals

> **Recommendations**  
> **10.3** For people with diabetes and hypertension, blood pressure goals should be individualized through a shared decision-making process that addresses cardiovascular risk, potential adverse effects of antihypertensive medications, and individual preferences.  
> **B 10.4** If it can be safely attained, the on-treatment blood pressure goal is <130/80 mmHg; a systolic blood pressure goal <120 mmHg should be encouraged in individuals with high cardiovascular or kidney risk.  
> **A**

Randomized clinical trials have demonstrated unequivocally that treatment of hypertension reduces cardiovascular events as well as microvascular complications (34–40). There has been controversy on the recommendation of a specific blood pressure goal in people with diabetes. The recommendation to support a blood pressure goal of <130/80 mmHg in people with diabetes is consistent with guidelines from the American College of Cardiology and American Heart Association (24), the International Society of Hypertension, and the European Society of Cardiology/European Society of Hypertension Blood Pressure/Hypertension Guidelines (26). Participants with diabetes comprised nearly 20% of the Strategy of Blood Pressure Intervention in the Elderly Hypertensive Patients (STEP) trial, which noted decreased cardiovascular events with treatment of hypertension to a systolic blood pressure goal of <130 mmHg (41). A systolic blood pressure goal of <120 mmHg is encouraged in those individuals with high cardiovascular or kidney risk because of the results of Blood Pressure Control Target in Diabetes (BPROAD) and the Effects of Intensive Systolic Blood Pressure Lowering Treatment in Reducing Risk of Vascular Events (ESPRIT) trials. BPROAD was an open-label trial that randomized individuals with diabetes and elevated CVD risk to an intensive systolic blood pressure goal of <120 mmHg and noted a 21% reduction in nonfatal stroke, nonfatal MI, heart failure, or cardiovascular death compared with the group receiving standard systolic blood pressure goal of <140 mmHg (42). ESPRIT also compared an intensive systolic blood pressure goal of <120 mmHg to a standard goal of <140 mmHg in individuals with diabetes (39%), prior stroke, or elevated cardiovascular risk. ESPRIT noted a significant 12% reduction in the primary outcome, a composite of MI, revascularization, hospitalization for heart failure, stroke, or cardiovascular death (43). The results of BPROAD and ESPRIT are supported.

2025 December 10 on guest by http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S216/848870/dc26s010.pdf Downloaded from



---


diabetesjournals.org/care     Cardiovascular  Disease  and  Risk  Management  S219

by the Systolic Blood Pressure Intervention Trial (SPRINT), which demonstrated that treatment to a goal systolic blood pressure of <120 mmHg decreases cardiovascular event rates by 25% in high-risk individuals, although people with diabetes were excluded from this trial (44). While the relatively underpowered ACCORD (Action to Control Cardiovascular Risk in Diabetes) blood pressure trial (ACCORD BP) did not demonstrate that aiming for a systolic blood pressure <120 mmHg in people with diabetes results in decreased cardiovascular event rates, the prespecified secondary outcome of stroke was reduced by 41% with intensive treatment (45). Notably, there is an absence of high-quality data available to guide blood pressure goals in people with type 1 diabetes, but a similar blood pressure goal of <130/80 mmHg is recommended in people with type 1 diabetes. As discussed below, treatment should be individualized. For more information on individualized blood pressure goals in older individuals, please see section 13, “Older Adults.”

### Randomized Controlled Trials of Intensive Versus Standard Blood Pressure Management

BPROAD provides the strongest evidence to support a systolic blood pressure treatment goal of <120 mmHg, as it enrolled people with type 2 diabetes and increased cardiovascular risk with a baseline systolic blood pressure ≥140 mmHg (or 130–180 mmHg if already taking antihypertensive medication). Increased cardiovascular risk was defined as a history of CVD at least 3 months before enrollment, subclinical CVD, two or more cardiovascular risk factors, and CKD (estimated glomerular filtration rate [eGFR] 30 to <60 mL/min/1.72 m²). The 12,821 participants with type 2 diabetes were randomized to a goal systolic blood pressure <120 mmHg or standard treatment (goal systolic blood pressure <140 mmHg). The primary outcome of nonfatal stroke, nonfatal MI, treatment or hospitalization for heart failure, or death from cardiovascular causes was reduced by 21% in the intensive treatment group (hazard ratio [HR] 0.79, 95% CI 0.69–0.90), with an achieved mean systolic blood pressure in the intensive group of 121.6 mmHg vs. 133.2 mmHg in the standard therapy group. Adverse event rates were similar in the two groups, although symptomatic hypotension and hyperkalemia were more frequent in the intensive therapy group (42).

A second, large blood pressure trial including a substantial number of people with diabetes was published since the development of the 2025 “Standards of Care in Diabetes.” The ESPRIT trial randomized 11,255 individuals with high cardiovascular risk (established CVD or two risk factors), of whom 39% had type 2 diabetes, to intensive treatment (goal systolic blood pressure of <120 mmHg) versus standard treatment (goal systolic blood pressure <140 mmHg). The primary outcome, a composite of MI, revascularization, hospitalization for heart failure, stroke, or cardiovascular death, was significantly reduced by 12% in the intensive therapy group (HR 0.88, 95% CI 0.78–0.99) irrespective of the diagnosis of diabetes at baseline. The investigators reported a modest increase in adverse events, including syncope (0.4% vs. 0.1%, HR 3.00, 95% CI 1.35–6.68) (43).

Although SPRINT excluded people with type 2 diabetes, it provides evidence to support the BPROAD and ESPRIT findings that lower blood pressure goals in individuals at increased cardiovascular risk improve outcome (44). The trial enrolled 9,361 individuals with a systolic blood pressure of ≥130 mmHg and increased cardiovascular risk and treated to a systolic blood pressure goal of <120 mmHg (intensive treatment) versus a goal of <140 mmHg (standard treatment). The primary composite outcome of MI, acute coronary syndromes, stroke, heart failure, or death from cardiovascular causes was reduced by 25% in the intensive treatment group. The achieved systolic blood pressures in the trial were 121 mmHg and 136 mmHg in the intensive versus standard treatment group, respectively. Adverse outcomes, including hypotension, syncope, electrolyte abnormality, and acute kidney injury (AKI), were more common in the intensive treatment arm; risk of adverse outcomes therefore needs to be weighed against the cardiovascular benefit of more intensive blood pressure lowering.

The STEP trial assigned 8,511 individuals aged 60–80 years with hypertension to a systolic blood pressure goal of 110 to <130 mmHg (intensive treatment) or 130 to <150 mmHg (40). In this trial, in which approximately 19% of participants had diabetes, the primary composite outcome of stroke, acute coronary syndrome, acute decompensated heart failure, coronary revascularization, atrial fibrillation, or death from cardiovascular causes occurred in 3.5% of individuals in the intensive treatment group versus 4.6% in the standard treatment group (HR 0.74 [95% CI 0.60–0.92]; P = 0.007). Hypotension occurred more frequently in the intensive treatment group (3.4%) compared with the standard treatment group (2.6%) without significant differences in other adverse events, including dizziness, syncope, or fractures. For more information on blood pressure goals in older adults, please see section 13, “Older Adults.”

ACCORD BP randomized 4,733 individuals with type 2 diabetes to intensive therapy (aiming for a systolic blood pressure <120 mmHg) or standard therapy (aiming for a systolic blood pressure <140 mmHg) (45). The mean achieved systolic blood pressures were 119 mmHg and 133 mmHg in the intensive and standard groups, respectively. The primary composite outcome of nonfatal MI, nonfatal stroke, or death from cardiovascular causes was not significantly reduced in the intensive treatment group, although the prespecified secondary outcome of stroke was significantly reduced by 41% in the intensive treatment group. Adverse events attributed to blood pressure treatment, including hypotension, syncope, bradycardia, hyperkalemia, and elevations in serum creatinine, occurred more frequently in the intensive treatment arm than in the standard therapy arm. ACCORD BP has been viewed as underpowered due to the composite primary end point being less sensitive to blood pressure intervention (44,45).

In the Action in Diabetes and Vascular Disease: Preterax and Diamicron MR Controlled Evaluation (ADVANCE) trial, 11,140 people with type 2 diabetes were randomized to receive either treatment with a fixed combination of perindopril and indapamide or matching placebo (46). The primary end point, a composite of cardiovascular death, nonfatal stroke or MI, or new or worsening kidney or eye disease, was reduced by 9% in the combination treatment. The achieved systolic blood pressure was ∼135 mmHg in the treatment group and 140 mmHg in the placebo group.

The Hypertension Optimal Treatment (HOT) trial enrolled 18,790 individuals and aimed for a diastolic blood pressure <90 mmHg, <85 mmHg, or <80 mmHg (47). The cardiovascular event rates, defined as fatal or nonfatal MI, fatal and nonfatal strokes, and all other cardiovascular events, were not significantly different between diastolic blood pressure goals (≤90 mmHg,

2025  December
      10 on  guest
                by     http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S216/848870/dc26s010.pdf
                       from   Downloaded



---



Cardiovascular Disease and Risk Management    Diabetes Care Volume 49, Supplement 1, January 2026

≤85 mmHg, and ≤80 mmHg), although the lowest incidence of cardiovascular events occurred with an achieved diastolic blood pressure of 82 mmHg. However, in people with diabetes, there was a significant 51% reduction in MI, stroke, and cardiovascular death in the treatment group with a goal diastolic blood pressure of <80 mmHg compared with a goal diastolic blood pressure of <90 mmHg.

**Individualization of Treatment Goals**  
People with diabetes and clinicians should engage in a shared decision-making process to determine individual blood pressure goals (23). A thorough review of the benefits and risks of intensive blood pressure goals is consistent with a person-focused approach to care that values individual priorities and health care professional judgment (48). Secondary analyses of ACCORD BP and SPRINT suggest that clinical factors can help identify individuals more likely to benefit from and less likely

----

### Recommendations for the treatment of confirmed hypertension in nonpregnant people with diabetes

<table>
<thead>
<tr>
<th colspan="3">Initial BP ≥130/80 and &lt;150/90 mmHg</th>
<th>Initial BP ≥150/90 mmHg</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Start one agent</td>
<td>Lifestyle management</td>
<td></td>
<td>Start two agents</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="2">Albuminuria or CAD*</td>
<td colspan="2">Albuminuria or CAD*</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>No</td>
<td>Yes</td>
<td>No</td>
<td>Yes</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Start ACEi or ARB or CCB† or diuretic‡</td>
<td>Start ACEi or ARB</td>
<td>Start two drugs from ACEi or ARB, CCB† or diuretic‡</td>
<td>Start ACEi or ARB and CCB† or diuretic‡</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="4" style="text-align:center; font-weight:bold; background-color:#00a0b0;">Assess BP goals§ and adverse effects</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><b>Treatment tolerated and goal achieved</b></td>
<td><b>Not meeting goal</b></td>
<td colspan="2"><b>Adverse effects</b></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Continue therapy</td>
<td>
Add agent from complementary drug class:  
<ul>
<li>ACEi or ARB</li>
<li>CCB†</li>
<li>Diuretic‡</li>
</ul>
</td>
<td colspan="2">
Consider change to alternative medication:  
<ul>
<li>ACEi or ARB</li>
<li>CCB†</li>
<li>Diuretic‡</li>
</ul>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><b>Not meeting goal on two agents</b></td>
<td colspan="3"></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="4" style="text-align:center; font-weight:bold; background-color:#00a0b0;">Assess BP goals§ and adverse effects</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><b>Treatment tolerated and goal achieved</b></td>
<td colspan="3"><b>Not meeting goal or adverse effects using a drug from each of three classes</b></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Continue therapy</td>
<td colspan="3">
Consider addition of mineralocorticoid receptor antagonist;  
refer to specialist with expertise in BP management
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

> **Figure 10.2** — Recommendations for the treatment of confirmed hypertension in nonpregnant people with diabetes.  
> *An ACE inhibitor (ACEi) or angiotensin receptor blocker (ARB) is suggested for the treatment of hypertension in people with coronary artery disease (CAD) or urine albumin-to-creatinine ratio 30–299 mg/g creatinine and is strongly recommended for individuals with urine albumin-to-creatinine ratio ≥300 mg/g creatinine.*  
> †Dihydropyridine calcium channel blocker (CCB).  
> ‡Thiazide-like diuretic; long-acting agents shown to reduce cardiovascular events, such as chlorthalidone and indapamide, are preferred.  
> §If it can be safely attained, the on-treatment blood pressure goal is <130/80 mmHg; a systolic blood pressure goal <120 mmHg should be encouraged in individuals with high cardiovascular or kidney risk. BP, blood pressure. Adapted from de Boer et al. (24).

2025 December 10 on guest by http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S216/848870/dc26s010.pdf Downloaded from



---


diabetesjournals.org/care     Cardiovascular  Disease  and  Risk  Management  S221

to be harmed by intensive blood pressure management (49,50).

Absolute benefit from blood pressure reduction correlated with absolute baseline cardiovascular risk in SPRINT and in earlier clinical trials conducted at higher baseline blood pressure levels (50,51). The results of BPROAD and ESPRIT highlight that targeting an on-treatment systolic blood pressure goal of <120 mmHg in people with high cardiovascular risk is associated with reduction in cardiovascular events compared with systolic blood pressure <140 mmHg. These benefits should be weighed against treatment-related adverse events such as hypotension and syncope, which may be particularly relevant in older individuals with orthostatic hypotension, substantial comorbidity, functional limitations, or polypharmacy and some individuals who may prefer higher blood pressure goals to enhance quality of life.

# Treatment Strategies

## Lifestyle Intervention

> **Recommendation 10.5**  
> For people with diabetes and blood pressure >120/80 mmHg, advise lifestyle behaviors including weight loss when indicated, a Dietary Approaches to Stop Hypertension (DASH)–style eating pattern including reducing sodium, limiting or avoiding alcohol consumption, increased physical activity, and smoking cessation. **A**

Lifestyle management is an important component of hypertension treatment because it lowers blood pressure, enhances the effectiveness of some antihypertensive medications, promotes other aspects of metabolic and vascular health, and generally leads to few adverse effects. Lifestyle therapy consists of reducing excess body weight through caloric restriction (see section 8, “Obesity and Weight Management for the Prevention and Treatment of Diabetes”), at least 150 min of moderate-intensity aerobic activity per week (see section 3, “Prevention or Delay of Diabetes and Associated Comorbidities”), restricting sodium intake (<2,300 mg/day), increasing consumption of fruits and vegetables (8–10 servings per day) and low-fat dairy products or nondairy alternatives (2–3 servings per day), avoiding excessive alcohol consumption (no more than 2 servings per day in men and no more than 1 serving per day in women) (52), and increasing activity levels (53) (see section 5, “Facilitating Positive Health Behaviors and Well-being to Improve Health Outcomes”). A systematic review of 10 randomized controlled trials reported that compared with control diet, the modified Dietary Approaches to Stop Hypertension (DASH) eating pattern could reduce mean systolic (−3.26 mmHg [95% CI −5.58 to −0.94 mmHg]; *P* = 0.006) and diastolic (−2.07 mmHg [95% CI −3.68 to −0.46 mmHg]; *P* = 0.01) blood pressure (54).

These lifestyle interventions are reasonable for individuals with diabetes and mildly elevated blood pressure (systolic >120 mmHg and diastolic <80 mmHg) and should be initiated along with pharmacologic therapy when hypertension is diagnosed (**Fig. 10.2**) (53). A lifestyle therapy plan should be developed in collaboration with the person with diabetes and discussed as part of diabetes management. Use of internet or mobile-based digital platforms to reinforce healthy behaviors may be considered as a component of care, as these interventions have been found to enhance the efficacy of medical therapy for hypertension (55,56).

## PHARMACOLOGIC INTERVENTIONS

> **Recommendations**  
> **10.6** In individuals with confirmed office-based blood pressure ≥130/80 mmHg, pharmacologic therapy should be initiated and titrated to achieve their individualized blood pressure goal. **A**  
> **10.7** Individuals with confirmed office-based blood pressure ≥150/90 mmHg should, in addition to lifestyle therapy, have prompt initiation and timely titration of two drugs or a single-pill combination of drugs for hypertension that have also been demonstrated to reduce cardiovascular events in people with diabetes. **A**  
> **10.8** Treatment for hypertension should include drug classes demonstrated to reduce cardiovascular events in people with diabetes. **A** ACE inhibitors or angiotensin receptor blockers (ARBs) are recommended first-line therapy for hypertension in people with diabetes and albuminuria or coronary artery disease. **A**  
> **10.9** Multiple-drug therapy is generally required to achieve blood pressure goals. However, avoid any combination of ACE inhibitors, ARBs (including ARBs and neprilysin inhibitors), and direct renin inhibitors. **A**  
> **10.10** In nonpregnant people with diabetes and hypertension, either an ACE inhibitor or ARB is recommended for those with moderately increased albuminuria (UACR 30–299 mg/g creatinine) **B** and is strongly recommended for those with severely increased albuminuria (UACR ≥300 mg/g creatinine) and/or estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) <60 mL/min/1.73 m² to maximally tolerated dose to prevent the progression of kidney disease and reduce cardiovascular events. **A** If one class is not tolerated, the other should be substituted. **B**  
> **10.11** Monitor for drop in eGFR and for increase in serum potassium levels at initiation and periodically as clinically appropriate when ACE inhibitors, ARBs, and mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists (MRAs) are used. **B** Monitor for hypokalemia when diuretics are used at routine visits and 7–14 days after initiation or after a dose change and periodically as clinically appropriate. **B**  
> **10.12** In sexually active individuals of childbearing potential who are not using reliable contraception, avoid ACE inhibitors, ARBs, MRAs, direct renin inhibitors, and neprilysin inhibitors, as they are contraindicated in pregnancy. **A**

### Initial Number of Antihypertensive Medications

Initial treatment for people with diabetes depends on the severity of hypertension (**Fig. 10.2**). Those with blood pressure between 130/80 mmHg and 150/90 mmHg may begin with a single drug. For individuals with blood pressure ≥150/90 mmHg, initial pharmacologic treatment with two antihypertensive medications is recommended to more effectively achieve blood pressure goals (57–59). Single-pill antihypertensive combinations may improve medication-taking behavior in some individuals (60,61).

### Classes of Antihypertensive Medications

Initial treatment for hypertension should include any of the drug classes demonstrated to reduce cardiovascular events in people with diabetes (27): ACE inhibitors (62), angiotensin receptor blockers (ARBs) (62), thiazide-like diuretics (63), or dihydropyridine calcium channel blockers (64).

2025  December  
10 on guest by http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S216/848870/dc26s010.pdf Downloaded from


---


Cardiovascular Disease and Risk Management     Diabetes Care Volume 49, Supplement 1, January 2026

In people with diabetes and established coronary artery disease, ACE inhibitors or ARBs are recommended first-line therapy for hypertension (65–67). For individuals with albuminuria (urine albumin-to-creatinine ratio [UACR] ≥30 mg/g), initial treatment should include an ACE inhibitor or ARB to reduce the risk of progressive kidney disease (24) (Fig. 10.2). In individuals receiving ACE inhibitor or ARB therapy, continuation of those medications as kidney function declines to eGFR <30 mL/min/1.73 m² may provide cardiovascular benefit without significantly increasing the risk of kidney failure (68). In the absence of albuminuria, risk of progressive kidney disease is low, and ACE inhibitors and ARBs have not been found to afford superior cardioprotection compared with thiazide-like diuretics or dihydropyridine calcium channel blockers (69). β-Blockers are indicated in the setting of prior MI, active angina, or HFrEF but have not been shown to reduce mortality as blood pressure–lowering agents in the absence of these conditions (36,70,71).

### Pregnancy and Antihypertensive Medications
Please refer to section 15, “Management of Diabetes in Pregnancy,” for additional information on pregnancy blood pressure goals and treatment. During pregnancy, treatment with ACE inhibitors, ARBs, direct renin inhibitors, mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists (MRAs), and neprilysin inhibitors are contraindicated, as they may cause fetal damage. Special consideration should be taken for individuals of childbearing potential, and people intending to become pregnant should switch from an ACE inhibitor or ARB, renin inhibitor, MRA, or neprilysin inhibitor to an alternative antihypertensive medication approved for use during pregnancy. Antihypertensive drugs known to be effective and safe in pregnancy include methyldopa, labetalol, and long-acting nifedipine, while hydralazine may be considered in the acute management of hypertension in pregnancy or severe preeclampsia (72). Diuretics are not recommended for blood pressure management in pregnancy but may be used during late-stage pregnancy if needed for volume management (72). The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists also recommends that, postpartum, individuals with gestational hypertension, preeclampsia, or both have their blood pressures observed for 72 h in the hospital and 7–10 days postpartum. Long-term follow-up is recommended for these individuals, as they have increased lifetime cardiovascular risk (73).

### Multiple-Drug Therapy
Multiple-drug therapy is often required to achieve blood pressure goals (Fig. 10.2), particularly in the setting of CKD in people with diabetes. However, the use of both ACE inhibitors and ARBs in combination, or the combination of an ACE inhibitor or ARB and a direct renin inhibitor, is contraindicated given the lack of added ASCVD benefit and increased rate of adverse events—namely, hyperkalemia, syncope, and AKI (74–76). Titration of and/or addition of further blood pressure medications should be made in a timely fashion to overcome therapeutic inertia in achieving blood pressure goals.

### Hyperkalemia and Acute Kidney Injury
Treatment with ACE inhibitors and ARBs or MRAs can cause AKI and hyperkalemia, while diuretics can cause AKI and either hypokalemia or hyperkalemia (depending on mechanism of action) (77,78). Elevations in serum creatinine (up to 30% from baseline) with ACE inhibitors or ARBs must not be confused with AKI (79). AKI is defined as a rapid decline in kidney function, typically within a short period (hours to days), characterized by increase in serum creatinine and/or decrease in urine output (80). Serum creatinine and potassium should be monitored after initiation of treatment with an ACE inhibitor or ARB, MRA, or diuretic and monitored during treatment and following uptitration of these medications, particularly among individuals with reduced glomerular filtration (77,78,81). For more information on AKI, see section 11, “Chronic Kidney Disease and Risk Management.”

### RESISTANT HYPERTENSION

> **Recommendation 10.13**  
> Individuals with hypertension who are not meeting blood pressure goals on three classes of antihypertensive medications (including a diuretic) should be considered for MRA therapy. **A**

Resistant hypertension is defined as blood pressure ≥130/80 mmHg despite a therapeutic strategy that includes appropriate lifestyle management plus a diuretic and two other antihypertensive drugs with complementary mechanisms of action at maximally tolerated doses. Prior to diagnosing resistant hypertension, a number of other conditions should be excluded, including missed doses of antihypertensive medications, white coat hypertension, and primary and secondary hypertension. Difficulty following the care plan may also be a reason for resistant hypertension. International Society of Hypertension guidelines put a strong emphasis on screening for care plan difficulties in management of hypertension and recommend using objective measures such as review of pharmacy records, pill counting, and the chemical analysis of blood or urine rather than subjective methods of detecting inconsistencies in care plan engagement in routine clinical practice. However, this may not be feasible in all practice settings (25).

People with diabetes and confirmed resistant hypertension should be evaluated for secondary causes of hypertension, including primary aldosteronism, renal artery stenosis, CKD, and obstructive sleep apnea. In general, barriers to medication taking (such as cost and side effects) should be identified and addressed (Fig. 10.2). MRAs, including spironolactone and eplerenone, are effective for management of resistant hypertension in people with type 2 diabetes when added to existing treatment with an ACE inhibitor or ARB, thiazide-like diuretic, or dihydropyridine calcium channel blocker (82). In addition, MRAs reduce albuminuria in people with diabetic nephropathy (83–85). However, adding an MRA to a treatment plan that includes an ACE inhibitor or ARB may increase the risk for hyperkalemia, emphasizing the importance of regular monitoring for serum creatinine and potassium in these individuals, and long-term outcome studies are needed to better evaluate the role of MRAs in blood pressure management.

### LIPID MANAGEMENT

#### Lifestyle Intervention

> **Recommendations 10.14**  
> Lifestyle modification focusing on weight loss (if indicated); application of a Mediterranean or DASH eating pattern; reduction of saturated fat and *trans* fat; increase of dietary n-3 fatty acids, soluble fiber, and plant stanol and sterol intake; and increased physical activity should be recommended to improve the lipid profile and reduce the risk of developing atherosclerotic

2025 December 10 on guest by http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S216/848870/dc26s010.pdf Downloaded from


---


diabetesjournals.org/care     Cardiovascular  Disease  and  Risk  Management  S223

cardiovascular disease (ASCVD) in people with diabetes. **A**  
**10.15** Intensify lifestyle therapy and optimize glycemic management for people with diabetes with elevated triglyceride levels (≥150 mg/dL [≥1.7 mmol/L]) and/or low HDL cholesterol (<40 mg/dL [<1.0 mmol/L] for men and <50 mg/dL [<1.3 mmol/L] for women). **C**

Lifestyle intervention, including weight loss in people with overweight or obesity (when appropriate) (22,86), increased physical activity, and medical nutrition therapy, allows some individuals to reduce ASCVD risk factors such as hypertension, dyslipidemia, or obesity. Nutrition intervention should be tailored according to each person’s age, pharmacologic treatment, lipid levels, and medical conditions.

Recommendations should focus on application of a Mediterranean (87) or DASH eating pattern, reducing saturated and *trans* fat intake, and increasing plant stanol and sterol, n-3 fatty acid, and viscous fiber (such as in oats, legumes, and citrus) intake (22,86). Glycemic management may also beneficially modify plasma lipid levels, particularly in people with very high triglycerides and poor glycemic management. See section 5, “Facilitating Positive Health Behaviors and Well-being to Improve Health Outcomes,” for additional nutrition information.

### Ongoing Therapy and Monitoring With Lipid Panel

**Recommendations**  
**10.16** In adults with prediabetes or diabetes not taking statins or other lipid-lowering therapy, it is reasonable to obtain a lipid profile at the time of diagnosis, at an initial medical evaluation, annually thereafter, or more frequently if indicated. **E**  
**10.17** Obtain a lipid profile at initiation of statins or other lipid-lowering therapy, 4–12 weeks after initiation or a change in dose, and annually thereafter, as it facilitates monitoring the response to therapy and informs medication-taking behavior. **A**

In adults with diabetes, it is reasonable to obtain a lipid profile (total cholesterol, LDL cholesterol, HDL cholesterol, and triglycerides) at the time of diagnosis, at the initial medical evaluation, and at least every 5 years thereafter in individuals <40 years of age. In younger people with longer duration of disease (such as those diagnosed in childhood or adolescence), more frequent lipid profiles may be reasonable. A lipid panel should also be obtained immediately before initiating statin therapy. Once an individual is taking a statin, LDL cholesterol levels should be assessed 4–12 weeks after initiation of statin therapy, after any change in dose, and annually (e.g., to monitor for medication taking and efficacy). Monitoring lipid profiles after initiation of statin therapy and during therapy increases the likelihood of dose titration and following the statin treatment plan (88–90). Clinicians should attempt to find a dose or alternative statin that is tolerable if side effects occur. There is evidence for benefit from even extremely low, less-than-daily statin doses (91).

## STATIN TREATMENT

### Primary Prevention

**Recommendations**  
**10.18** For people with diabetes aged 40–75 years without ASCVD, use moderate-intensity statin therapy in addition to lifestyle therapy. **A**  
**10.19** For people with diabetes aged 20–39 years with additional ASCVD risk factors, it may be reasonable to initiate statin therapy in addition to lifestyle therapy. **C**  
**10.20** For people with diabetes aged 40–75 years at higher cardiovascular risk, including those with one or more additional ASCVD risk factors, high-intensity statin therapy is recommended to reduce LDL cholesterol by ≥50% of baseline and to obtain an LDL cholesterol goal of <70 mg/dL (<1.8 mmol/L). **A**  
**10.21** For people with diabetes aged 40–75 years at higher cardiovascular risk, especially those with multiple additional ASCVD risk factors and an LDL cholesterol ≥70 mg/dL (≥1.8 mmol/L), it may be reasonable to add ezetimibe or a proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type 9 (PCSK9) inhibitor to maximum tolerated statin therapy. **B**  
**10.22** In adults with diabetes aged >75 years already on statin therapy, it is reasonable to continue statin treatment. **B**  
**10.23** In adults with diabetes aged >75 years, it may be reasonable to initiate moderate-intensity statin therapy after discussion of potential benefits and risks. **C**  
**10.24** In people with diabetes intolerant to statin therapy, treatment with bempedoic acid is recommended to reduce cardiovascular event rates as an alternative cholesterol-lowering plan. **A**  
**10.25** In most circumstances, lipid-lowering agents should be stopped prior to conception and avoided in sexually active individuals of childbearing potential who are not using reliable contraception. **B** In some circumstances (e.g., familial hypercholesterolemia, familial hypertriglyceridemia, prior ASCVD event, or history of pancreatitis), lipid-lowering therapy may be continued when the benefits outweigh risks. **E**

### Secondary Prevention

**Recommendations**  
**10.26** For people of all ages with diabetes and ASCVD, high-intensity statin therapy should be added to lifestyle therapy. **A**  
**10.27** For people with diabetes and ASCVD, treatment with high-intensity statin therapy is recommended to obtain an LDL cholesterol reduction of ≥50% from baseline and an LDL cholesterol goal of <55 mg/dL (<1.4 mmol/L). Addition of ezetimibe or a PCSK9 inhibitor with proven benefit in this population is recommended if this goal is not achieved on maximum tolerated statin therapy. **B**  
**10.28a** For individuals who do not tolerate the intended statin intensity, the maximum tolerated statin dose should be used. **E**  
**10.28b** For people with diabetes and ASCVD intolerant to statin therapy, PCSK9 monoclonal antibody therapy, **A** bempedoic acid therapy, **A** or PCSK9 inhibitor therapy with inclisiran siRNA **E** should be considered as an alternative cholesterol-lowering therapy.

### Initiating Statin Therapy

People with type 2 diabetes have an increased prevalence of lipid abnormalities, contributing to their high risk of ASCVD. Multiple clinical trials have demonstrated

2025  December  
10 on guest by http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S216/848870/dc26s010.pdf Downloaded from


---



Cardiovascular Disease and Risk Management     Diabetes Care Volume 49, Supplement 1, January 2026

the beneficial effects of statin therapy on ASCVD outcomes in subjects with and without established ASCVD (92,93). Subgroup analyses of people with diabetes in larger trials (94–98) and trials in people with diabetes (99,100) showed significant primary and secondary prevention of ASCVD events and coronary heart disease (CHD) death in people with diabetes. Meta-analyses including data from >18,000 people with diabetes from 14 randomized trials of statin therapy (mean follow-up 4.3 years) demonstrated a 9% proportional reduction in all-cause mortality and 13% reduction in vascular mortality for each 1 mmol/L (39 mg/dL) reduction in LDL cholesterol (101). The cardiovascular benefit in this large meta-analysis did not depend on baseline LDL cholesterol levels and was linearly related to the LDL cholesterol reduction without a low threshold beyond which there was no benefit observed (101). It is important to note that the effects of statin therapy do not differ based on sex (92).

Accordingly, statins are the drugs of choice for LDL cholesterol lowering and cardioprotection. **Table 10.1** shows the two statin dosing intensities that are recommended for use in clinical practice. High-intensity statin therapy will achieve an approximately ≥50% reduction in LDL cholesterol, and moderate-intensity statin plans achieve 30–49% reductions in LDL cholesterol. Low-dose statin therapy is generally not recommended in people with diabetes but is sometimes the only dose of statin that an individual can tolerate. For individuals who do not tolerate the intended intensity of statin, the maximum tolerated statin dose should be used.

As in those without diabetes, absolute reductions in ASCVD outcomes (CHD death and nonfatal MI) are greatest in people with high baseline ASCVD risk (known ASCVD and/or very high LDL cholesterol levels), but the overall benefits of statin therapy in people with diabetes at moderate or even low risk for ASCVD are convincing (102,103). The relative benefit of lipid-lowering therapy has been uniform across most subgroups tested (101,104), including subgroups that varied with respect to age and other risk factors.

### Primary Prevention (People Without ASCVD)

For primary prevention, moderate-dose statin therapy is recommended for those aged ≥40 years (22,105,106), although high-intensity therapy should be considered in the context of additional ASCVD risk factors, such as older age, hypertension, dyslipidemia, smoking, CKD, or obesity (**Fig. 10.3**). The evidence is strong for people with diabetes aged 40–75 years, an age-group well represented in statin trials showing benefit. Since cardiovascular risk is enhanced in people with diabetes, as noted above, individuals who also have multiple other coronary risk factors have increased risk, equivalent to that of those with ASCVD. Therefore, current guidelines recommend that in people with diabetes who are at higher cardiovascular risk, especially those with one or more ASCVD risk factors such as older age, hypertension, dyslipidemia, smoking, CKD, or obesity, high-intensity statin therapy should be prescribed to reduce LDL cholesterol by ≥50% from baseline and to obtain an LDL cholesterol of <70 mg/dL (<1.8 mmol/L) (107–109). Since, in clinical practice, it is frequently difficult to ascertain the baseline LDL cholesterol level prior to statin therapy initiation, in those individuals, a focus on an LDL cholesterol goal of <70 mg/dL (<1.8 mmol/L) rather than percent reduction in LDL cholesterol is recommended. In those individuals, it may also be reasonable to add ezetimibe or proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type 9 (PCSK9) inhibitor therapy to maximum tolerated statin therapy if needed to reduce LDL cholesterol levels by ≥50% and to achieve the recommended LDL cholesterol goal of <70 mg/dL (<1.8 mmol/L) (110). While there are no randomized controlled trials specifically assessing cardiovascular outcomes of adding ezetimibe or PCSK9 inhibitors to statin therapy in primary prevention, a portion of the participants without established CVD were included in some studies, which also included participants with established CVD. A meta-analysis suggests that there is a cardiovascular benefit of adding ezetimibe or PCSK9 inhibitors to treatment for people at high risk (111). Less evidence is available for individuals aged >75 years, as few older people with diabetes have been enrolled in primary prevention trials. However, heterogeneity by age has not been seen in the relative benefit of lipid-lowering therapy in trials that included older participants (100,101,104), and because older age confers higher risk, the absolute benefits are actually greater (104,112). Moderate-intensity statin therapy is recommended in people with diabetes who are ≥75 years of age. However, the risk-benefit profile should be routinely evaluated in this population, with downward titration of dose performed as needed. See section 13, “Older Adults,” for more details on clinical considerations for this population.

### Age <40 Years and/or Type 1 Diabetes

Very little clinical trial evidence exists for people with type 2 diabetes under the age of 40 years or for people with type 1 diabetes of any age. For pediatric recommendations, see section 14, “Children and Adolescents.” In the Heart Protection Study (lower age limit 40 years), the subgroup of ~600 people with type 1 diabetes had a reduction in risk proportionately similar, although not statistically significant, to that in people with type 2 diabetes (95). Even though the data are not definitive, similar statin treatment approaches should be considered for people with type 1 or type 2 diabetes, particularly in the presence of other cardiovascular risk factors. Individuals <40 years of age have lower risk of developing a cardiovascular event over a 10-year period; however, their lifetime risk of developing CVD and experiencing an MI, stroke, or cardiovascular death is high. For people who are <40 years of age and/or have type 1 diabetes with other ASCVD risk factors (such as older age, hypertension,

<table>
    <thead>
    <tr>
        <th colspan="2">Table 10.1—High-intensity and moderate-intensity statin therapy</th>
    </tr>
    </thead>
    <tr>
        <td>High-intensity  statin  therapy 
(lowers LDL  cholesterol by ≥50%)</td>
<td>Moderate-intensity  statin  therapy 
(lowers LDL  cholesterol by  30–49%)</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>Atorvastatin  40–80  mg</td>
<td>Atorvastatin  10–20  mg</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>Rosuvastatin 20–40  mg</td>
<td>Rosuvastatin 5–10  mg</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td></td>
<td>Simvastatin 20–40  mg</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td></td>
<td>Pravastatin  40–80  mg</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td></td>
<td>Lovastatin  40  mg</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td></td>
<td>Fluvastatin  XL  80  mg</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td></td>
<td>Pitavastatin  1–4  mg</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td colspan="2">Once-daily dosing.  XL,  extended  release.</td>
    </tr>
</table>



---



diabetesjournals.org/care    Cardiovascular  Disease  and  Risk  Management  S225

# Lipid management for primary prevention of atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease events in people with diabetes in addition to healthy behavior modification

<table>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>In people 20-39 years of age</th>
<th>In people 40-75 years of age</th>
<th>In people &gt;75 years of age</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
Consider statin therapy if there are additional ASCVD risk factors.*
</td>
<td>
Use moderate-intensity statin therapy in those without ASCVD risk factors.*
<br><br>
Use a high-intensity statin in those with ≥1 ASCVD risk factor,* with an LDL cholesterol goal of &lt;70 mg/dL (&lt;1.8 mmol/L).
</td>
<td rowspan="2">
Continue current statin therapy or consider initiating a moderate-intensity statin after weighing benefits and risks.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>
Use bempedoic acid for those who are statin intolerant.
<br><br>
It may be reasonable to add ezetimibe or anti-PCSK9 therapy with proven cardiovascular benefit to maximum tolerated statin therapy if LDL goal is not achieved.
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

> **Figure 10.3** — Recommendations for primary prevention of atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease (ASCVD) in people with diabetes using cholesterol-lowering therapy.  
> *ASCVD risk factors include older age, hypertension, dyslipidemia, smoking, chronic kidney disease, or obesity. Adapted from “Standards of Care in Diabetes—2024 Abridged for Primary Care Professionals” (315).

Dyslipidemia, smoking, CKD, or obesity), it is recommended that the individual and health care professional discuss the relative benefits and risks and consider the use of moderate-intensity statin therapy. Please refer to “Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus and Cardiovascular Disease: A Scientific Statement From the American Heart Association and American Diabetes Association” (113) for additional discussion. Recent data from the PCSK9 inhibitor trial FOURIER (Further Cardiovascular Outcomes Research With PCSK9 Inhibition in Subjects With Elevated Risk) suggest that LDL cholesterol–lowering benefit has important cardiovascular risk reduction benefits in people with type 1 diabetes and established CVD, as discussed in **SECONDARY PREVENTION (PEOPLE WITH ASCVD)**, below (114).

## Secondary Prevention (People With ASCVD)

Intensive therapy is indicated because cardiovascular event rates are increased in people with diabetes and established ASCVD, and it has been shown to be of benefit in multiple large meta-analyses and randomized cardiovascular outcomes trials (93,101,104,112,115). High-intensity statin therapy is recommended for all people with diabetes and ASCVD to obtain an LDL cholesterol reduction of ≥50% from baseline and an LDL cholesterol goal of <55 mg/dL (<1.4 mmol/L) (Fig. 10.4). The addition of ezetimibe or a PCSK9 inhibitor is recommended if this goal is not achieved on maximum tolerated statin therapy. These recommendations are based on the observation that high-intensity versus moderate-intensity statin therapy reduces cardiovascular event rates in high-risk individuals with established CVD in randomized trials (93). The Cholesterol Treatment Trialists’ Collaboration, involving 26 statin trials, of which 5 compared high-intensity versus moderate-intensity statins, showed a 21% reduction in major cardiovascular events in people with diabetes for every 39 mg/dL (1 mmol/L) of LDL cholesterol lowering, irrespective of baseline LDL cholesterol or individual characteristics (101). The evidence to support lower LDL cholesterol goals in people with diabetes and established CVD derives from multiple large, randomized trials investigating the benefits of adding nonstatin agents to statin therapy, including combination treatment with statins and ezetimibe (112,116) or PCSK9 inhibitors (115,117–119). Each trial found a large benefit in reducing ASCVD events that was directly

# Lipid management for secondary prevention of atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease events in people with diabetes

<table>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Use lifestyle and high-intensity statin therapy to reduce LDL cholesterol by ≥50% from baseline to a goal of &lt;55 mg/dL (&lt;1.4 mmol/L).</th>
<th>Add ezetimibe or anti-PCSK9 therapy with proven cardiovascular benefit if LDL cholesterol goals are not met on maximum tolerated statin therapy.</th>
<th>Use an alternative lipid-lowering treatment for those who are statin intolerant:</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td>
* PCSK9 monoclonal antibody with proven cardiovascular benefit  
* Bempedoic acid  
* PCSK9 inhibition with siRNA inclisiran
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

> **Figure 10.4** — Recommendations for secondary prevention of atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease (ASCVD) in people with diabetes using cholesterol-lowering therapy. Adapted from “Standards of Care in Diabetes—2024 Abridged for Primary Care Professionals” (315).

2025  December 10 on guest by http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S216/848870/dc26s010.pdf Downloaded from



---



Cardiovascular Disease and Risk Management     Diabetes Care Volume 49, Supplement 1, January 2026

related to the degree of further LDL cholesterol lowering. A large number of participants with diabetes were included in these trials, and prespecified analyses were completed to evaluate cardiovascular outcomes in people with and without diabetes (116,118,119). The decision to add a nonstatin agent should be made following a discussion between a clinician and a person with diabetes about the net benefit, safety, and cost of combination therapy.

## Combination Therapy for LDL Cholesterol Lowering

### Statins and Ezetimibe

The best evidence for combination therapy of statins and ezetimibe comes from the IMProved Reduction of Outcomes: Vytorin Efficacy International Trial (IMPROVE-IT). The trial showed the addition of ezetimibe to a moderate-intensity statin led to a 6.4% relative benefit and a 2% absolute reduction in major adverse cardiovascular events (atherosclerotic cardiovascular events), with the degree of benefit being directly proportional to the change in LDL cholesterol (112). A subanalysis of participants with diabetes (27% of the 18,144 participants) showed a significant reduction of major adverse cardiovascular events with the combination treatment over moderate-intensity statin alone (116).

### Statins and PCSK9 Inhibitors

The addition of the PCSK9 monoclonal antibodies evolocumab and alirocumab to maximum tolerated doses of statin therapy in participants who were at high risk for ASCVD demonstrated an average reduction in LDL cholesterol ranging from 52% to 65% (120,121). No cardiovascular outcome trials have been performed to assess whether PCSK9 inhibitor therapy reduces ASCVD event rates in individuals at low or moderate risk for ASCVD (primary prevention). The evidence on the effect of PSCK9 monoclonal antibodies on ASCVD outcomes is from studies of treatment with alirocumab and evolocumab. When added to a maximally tolerated statin, these agents reduced LDL cholesterol by ~60% (115) and significantly reduced the risk of major adverse cardiovascular events by 15–20% in the FOURIER (evolocumab) and ODYSSEY OUTCOMES (Evaluation of Cardiovascular Outcomes After an Acute Coronary Syndrome During Treatment With Alirocumab) trials (115,117,122). In the subanalyses of the participants with diabetes (40% in FOURIER and 28.8% in ODYSSEY OUTCOMES), similar benefits were seen compared with those for individuals without diabetes in FOURIER (119), whereas a greater absolute risk reduction was seen for participants with diabetes (2.3% [95% CI 0.4–4.2]) than for those with prediabetes (1.2% [0.0–2.4]) or normoglycemia (1.2% [−0.3–2.7]) in the ODYSSEY OUTCOMES trial (118). While clinical outcome data for the effects of LDL cholesterol lowering in people with type 1 diabetes are scarce, a stratified analysis of FOURIER provided insights on the background risk of cardiovascular events in people with type 1, type 2, or no diabetes (114). Of the 27,564 participants in FOURIER, 197 (0.7%) had type 1 diabetes and 10,834 (39.3%) had type 2 diabetes. Participants with type 1 diabetes randomly assigned to placebo had a higher rate of major cardiovascular events (Kaplan-Meier event rate 20.4%) than those with type 2 diabetes (15.2%) and those without diabetes (11.0%). The relative reduction in the risk of the primary major adverse cardiovascular event outcome with active compared with placebo evolocumab was similar across different types or statuses of diabetes (type 1 diabetes HR 0.66, 95% CI 0.32–1.38; type 2 diabetes HR 0.84, 95% CI 0.75–0.93; no diabetes HR 0.87, 95% CI 0.79–0.96). These observations suggest that the absolute risk reduction of major cardiovascular events with evolocumab in individuals with type 1 diabetes was at least as large, if not larger, than that seen for type 2 diabetes or no diabetes. These data support the use of PCSK9 inhibitors in the achievement of aggressive LDL cholesterol lowering in people with type 1 diabetes and established ASCVD (114).

In addition to the monoclonal antibodies, an siRNA, inclisiran, which also targets PSCK9 and is referred to as a PCSK9 siRNA in this section, has demonstrated the ability to reduce LDL cholesterol by 49–52% in trials evaluating individuals with established CVD or ASCVD risk equivalent (123). Cardiovascular outcome trials using inclisiran in people with established CVD (124,125) and for primary prevention in those at high risk for CVD (126) are currently ongoing. For this reason, therapy with the PCSK9 monoclonal antibodies (alirocumab and evolocumab) is preferred to therapy with PCSK9 siRNA (inclisiran).

### Intolerance to Statin Therapy

Statin therapy is a cornerstone of CVD prevention and treatment; however, a subset of individuals experience partial (inability to tolerate sufficient dosage necessary to achieve therapeutic objectives due to adverse effects) or complete (inability to tolerate any dose) intolerance to statin therapy (127). Although the definition of statin intolerance differs between organizations and across clinical study methods, these individuals will require an alternative treatment approach. Initial steps in people intolerant to statins may include switching to a different high-intensity statin if a high-intensity statin is indicated, switching to moderate-intensity or low-intensity statin, lowering the statin dose, or using nondaily dosing with statins. While considering these alternative treatment plans, the addition of nonstatin treatment plans to maximum tolerated statin therapy should be considered, as these are frequently associated with improved medication-taking behavior and achievement of LDL cholesterol goals (127).

### PCSK9-Directed Therapies

The PCSK9 monoclonal antibodies alirocumab and evolocumab both have been shown to be effective for LDL cholesterol reduction and fewer skeletal muscle–related adverse effects when studied in populations considered statin intolerant. The Study of Alirocumab in Patients With Primary Hypercholesterolemia and Moderate, High, or Very High Cardiovascular Risk, Who Are Intolerant to Statins (ODYSSEY ALTERNATIVE) trial studied the reduction in LDL cholesterol with alirocumab compared with ezetimibe or 20 mg atorvastatin in individuals at moderate to very high cardiovascular risk for 24 weeks. The proportion of the study population with type 2 diabetes was ∼24%. After the 24 weeks, alirocumab lowered LDL cholesterol levels by 54.8% versus 20.1% with ezetimibe. There were similar rates of any adverse event for all treatments; however, fewer events that led to treatment discontinuation and few skeletal muscle–related adverse events occurred with alirocumab (128).

The Goal Achievement After Utilizing an Anti-PCSK9 Antibody in Statin Intolerant Subjects 1, 2, and 3 (GAUSS 1, 2, and 3) trials, as well as the Open-Label Study of Long-term Evaluation Against LDL Cholesterol (OSLER) open-label extension of the GAUSS 1 and 2 trials, evaluated the safety and LDL cholesterol reduction of evolocumab plus ezetimibe compared with

2025 December 10 on guest by http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S216/848870/dc26s010.pdf Downloaded from



---


diabetesjournals.org/care     Cardiovascular  Disease  and  Risk  Management  S227

ezetimibe alone in individuals with statin intolerance.  
Reductions in LDL cholesterol ranged from 55% and 56% for evolocumab biweekly and monthly plus daily oral placebo, respectively, to 19% and 16% for ezetimibe daily plus biweekly or monthly subcutaneous placebo, respectively. Fewer musculoskeletal adverse effects occurred in those treated with evolocumab or ezetimibe than in those treated with ezetimibe plus placebo, although rates of discontinuation due to these effects were similar. Use of low-dose statins was allowed in these studies and was associated with an increase in the incidence of musculoskeletal adverse effects (129,130). Similar LDL cholesterol reductions were demonstrated in the GAUSS 3 trial after 24 weeks (54.5% with evolocumab compared with 16.7% with ezetimibe), with slightly higher rates of musculoskeletal adverse events (20.7% with evolocumab and 28.8% with ezetimibe). The higher rates of these adverse events may be due in part to the first phase of this trial, which randomized individuals to a statin rechallenge with either atorvastatin or placebo (131).

Inclisiran, a PCSK9 siRNA, has also been proposed as an option for individuals with statin intolerance. Although most of the individuals in studies of inclisiran were on statin therapy, one short-term study (Trial to Evaluate the Effect of ALN-PCSSC Treatment on Low-density Lipoprotein Cholesterol [ORION-1]) included individuals with documented statin intolerance (132) and could continue into an open-label extension trial (Extension Trial of Inclisiran in Participants With Cardiovascular Disease and High Cholesterol [ORION-3]), where an LDL cholesterol reduction of ∼45% was maintained through the end of year 4 (133). It is important to note that of the ORION-3 participants, 23% had diabetes and 33% were not taking statin therapy. Although it may be expected that those with statin intolerance experienced a response similar to the response of those on statin therapy, evaluation of response based on background lipid-lowering therapy was not described.

### Bempedoic Acid  
Bempedoic acid, a newer LDL cholesterol–lowering agent targeting the same pathway as statins but without activity in skeletal muscle, thus limiting muscle-related adverse effects, lowers LDL cholesterol levels by 15% for those on statins and 24% for those not taking statins (134). Use of this agent with ezetimibe results in an additional 19% reduction in LDL cholesterol (134). The Evaluation of Major Cardiovascular Events in Patients With, or at High Risk for, Cardiovascular Disease Who Are Statin Intolerant Treated With Bempedoic Acid or Placebo (CLEAR Outcomes) trial found a reduction in four-point major adverse cardiovascular events by 13% compared with placebo for individuals with established ASCVD (70% of population) or at high risk for ASCVD (30% of population) and considered to be intolerant to statin therapy. It is important to note that ∼19% of individuals were on very-low-dose statin therapy at baseline (135). Prespecified subanalyses evaluated the impact for individuals with diabetes and showed a 17% reduction in four-point major adverse cardiovascular events when treated with bempedoic acid (136). For individuals requiring primary prevention, the use of bempedoic acid resulted in a 30% reduction in primary composite outcome compared with placebo (137).

### Lipid-Lowering Care Considerations for Individuals of Childbearing Potential  
Individuals of childbearing potential are less likely to be treated with statins or achieve their LDL cholesterol goals based on their cardiovascular risk (138–140). This is likely related to concerns and lack of familiarity with the use of lipid-lowering agents during pregnancy. The trials evaluating the efficacy and safety of lipid-lowering medications exclude individuals who are pregnant and require individuals of childbearing potential to use contraception (some requiring two forms). Therefore, for many pregnant individuals, it is recommended that they discontinue lipid-lowering therapies during gestation. However, for individuals at higher risk for cardiovascular events (e.g., those with familial hypercholesterolemia or preexisting ASCVD), the risk of discontinuing all lipid-lowering therapy during preconception and pregnancy should be reviewed and weighed against an increased risk for cardiovascular events. Consideration of initiating statin therapy during pregnancy should occur with these high-risk individuals. Although the evidence is limited, statins did not increase teratogenic effects for individuals with familial hypercholesterolemia (141,142), and a meta-analysis of pravastatin in pregnant individuals showed a reduction in preeclampsia, premature birth, and neonatal intensive care unit admissions (143). There is limited information regarding the use of lipid-lowering therapies (other than bile acid sequestrants) during pregnancy. Thus, it is recommended that individuals of childbearing potential use a form of contraception when also using lipid-lowering medications with unknown risks, limited evidence on safety, or known risks during pregnancy regardless of intention to become pregnant, as many pregnancies are unplanned, and preconception counseling should be part of the routine care of individuals with diabetes who have childbearing potential. Counseling should include the known benefits and risks of lipid-lowering medications versus the risks and benefits of not treating the conditions for which they are prescribed, as well as other medications (e.g., noninsulin glucose-lowering therapies and antihypertensive agents), during pregnancy and recommendations for when changes in medications should occur prior to pregnancy (138) (see section 15, “Management of Diabetes in Pregnancy,” for more information on preconception counseling and lipid-lowering treatment during pregnancy).

### Treatment of Other Lipoprotein Fractions or Goals  

> **Recommendations**  
> **10.29** For individuals with fasting triglyceride levels ≥500 mg/dL (≥5.7 mmol/L), evaluate for secondary causes of hypertriglyceridemia and consider medical therapy to reduce the risk of pancreatitis. **C**  
> **10.30** In adults with hypertriglyceridemia (fasting triglycerides >150 mg/dL [>1.7 mmol/L] or nonfasting triglycerides >175 mg/dL [>2.0 mmol/L]), clinicians should address and treat lifestyle factors (obesity and metabolic syndrome), secondary factors (diabetes, chronic liver or kidney disease and/or nephrotic syndrome, and hypothyroidism), and medications that raise triglycerides. **C**  
> **10.31** In individuals with ASCVD or other cardiovascular risk factors on a statin with managed LDL cholesterol but elevated triglycerides (150–499 mg/dL [1.7–5.6 mmol/L]), the addition of icosapent ethyl can be considered to reduce cardiovascular risk. **B**

Hypertriglyceridemia should be addressed with nutritional and lifestyle

2025  December 10 on guest by http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S216/848870/dc26s010.pdf Downloaded from


---



S228  Cardiovascular Disease and Risk Management     Diabetes Care Volume 49, Supplement 1, January 2026

changes, including weight loss and abstinence from alcohol (144). Severe hypertriglyceridemia (fasting triglycerides ≥500 mg/dL [≥5.7 mmol/L] and especially >1,000 mg/dL [>11.3 mmol/L]) may warrant pharmacologic therapy (fibric acid derivatives and/or fish oil) and reduction in fat intake to reduce the risk of acute pancreatitis (145). Moderate- or high-intensity statin therapy should also be used as indicated to reduce risk of cardiovascular events (see STATIN TREATMENT, above) (144,146). In people with hypertriglyceridemia (fasting triglycerides >150 mg/dL [>1.7 mmol/L] or nonfasting triglycerides >175 mg/dL [>2.0 mmol/L]), lifestyle interventions, treatment of secondary factors, and avoidance of medications that might raise triglycerides are recommended.

For individuals with established CVD or with risk factors for CVD with elevated triglycerides (150–499 mg/dL [1.7–5.6 mmol/L]) after maximizing statin therapy, icosapent ethyl may be added to reduce cardiovascular risk. The Reduction of Cardiovascular Events with Icosapent Ethyl-Intervention Trial (REDUCE-IT) showed that the addition of icosapent ethyl to statin therapy in this population resulted in a 25% relative risk reduction (P < 0.001) for the primary end point composite of cardiovascular death, nonfatal MI, nonfatal stroke, coronary revascularization, or unstable angina compared with placebo. This risk reduction was seen in individuals with or without diabetes at baseline. The composite of cardiovascular death, nonfatal MI, or nonfatal stroke was reduced by 26% (P < 0.001). Additional ischemic end points were significantly lower in the icosapent ethyl group than in the placebo group, including cardiovascular death, which was reduced by 20% (P = 0.03). The proportions of individuals experiencing adverse events and serious adverse events were similar between the active and placebo treatment groups. Current evidence from randomized trials does not support cardiovascular risk reduction for other n-3 fatty acids, and results of the REDUCE-IT trial should not be extrapolated to other products (147). As an example, the addition of 4 g per day of a carboxylic acid formulation of the n-3 fatty acids eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) and docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) (n-3 carboxylic acid) to statin therapy in individuals with atherogenic dyslipidemia and high cardiovascular risk, 70% of whom had diabetes, did not reduce the risk of major adverse cardiovascular events compared with the inert comparator of corn oil (148).

Low levels of HDL cholesterol, often associated with elevated triglyceride levels, are the most prevalent pattern of dyslipidemia in people with type 2 diabetes. However, the evidence for the use of drugs that target these lipid fractions is substantially less robust than that for statin therapy (149). Neither the ACCORD-lipid trial nor the Pemafibrate to Reduce Cardiovascular Outcomes by Reducing Triglycerides in Patients with Diabetes (PROMINENT) trial, both conducted in people with type 2 diabetes on statin therapy, found that the fibrate fenofibrate or pemafibrate improved cardiovascular outcomes (150,151).

> ### Other Combination Therapy
> 
> **Recommendations**  
> 10.32 In individuals receiving statin therapy, the addition of fibrate, niacin, or dietary supplements containing n-3 fatty acids is not recommended as they do not provide additional cardiovascular risk reduction. **A**

**Statin and Fibrate Combination Therapy**  
Combination therapy (statin and fibrate) is associated with an increased risk for abnormal transaminase levels, myositis, and rhabdomyolysis. The risk of rhabdomyolysis is more common with higher doses of statins and renal insufficiency and appears to be higher when statins are combined with gemfibrozil (compared with fenofibrate) (152).

In the ACCORD study, in people with type 2 diabetes who were at high risk for ASCVD, the combination of fenofibrate and simvastatin did not reduce the rate of fatal cardiovascular events, nonfatal MI, or nonfatal stroke compared with simvastatin alone (153). In the PROMINENT trial, in people with type 2 diabetes and elevated triglycerides (≥200 mg/dL and low HDL [≤40 mg/dL]), pemafibrate 0.2 mg twice daily reduced triglycerides by 26% but did not reduce the risk of the primary outcome of nonfatal MI, nonfatal stroke, hospitalization for unplanned coronary revascularization, or cardiovascular death (151). Therefore, combination therapy with statin and fibrate is not recommended for cardiovascular risk reduction.

**Statin and Niacin Combination Therapy**  
Combination therapy with a statin and niacin is not recommended, given the lack of efficacy on major ASCVD outcomes and increased side effects. Monotherapy with niacin is also not recommended. Large clinical trials, including the Atherothrombosis Intervention in Metabolic Syndrome With Low HDL/High Triglycerides: Impact on Global Health Outcomes (AIM-HIGH) and Heart Protection Study 2–Treatment of HDL to Reduce the Incidence of Vascular Events (HPS2-THRIVE) trials, failed to demonstrate a benefit of adding niacin to individuals on appropriate statin therapy. In fact, there was a possible increased risk of ischemic stroke in the AIM-HIGH trial (154) and an increased incidence of new-onset diabetes (absolute excess, 1.3 percentage points; *P* < 0.001) and disturbances in diabetes management among those with diabetes in the HPS2-THRIVE trial in those on combination therapy (155).

### Diabetes Risk With Statin Use  
Several studies have reported a modestly increased risk of incident type 2 diabetes with statin use (156,157), which may be limited to those with diabetes risk factors and/or impaired glucose tolerance. An analysis of one of the initial studies suggested that although statin use was associated with diabetes risk, the cardiovascular event rate reduction with statins far outweighed the risk of incident diabetes, even for individuals at highest risk for diabetes (158). The absolute risk increase was small (over 5 years of follow-up, 1.2% of participants on placebo developed diabetes and 1.5% on rosuvastatin developed diabetes) (158). A meta-analysis of 13 randomized statin trials with 91,140 participants showed an odds ratio of 1.09 for a new diagnosis of diabetes, so that (on average) treatment of 255 individuals with statins for 4 years resulted in one additional case of diabetes while simultaneously preventing 5.4 vascular events among those 255 individuals (157).

### Lipid-Lowering Agents and Cognitive Function  
Although concerns regarding a potential adverse impact of lipid-lowering agents on cognitive function have been raised, several lines of evidence argue against this association, as detailed in a 2018 European Atherosclerosis Society Consensus

2025 December 10 on guest by http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S216/848870/dc26s010.pdf Downloaded from



---


diabetesjournals.org/care     Cardiovascular  Disease  and  Risk  Management  S229

Panel statement (159). First, there are three large, randomized trials of statin versus placebo where specific cognitive tests were performed, and no differences were seen between statin and placebo (160–163). In addition, no change in cognitive function has been reported in studies with the addition of ezetimibe (112) or PCSK9 monoclonal antibodies (115,164) to statin therapy, including among individuals treated to very low LDL cholesterol levels. In addition, systematic reviews of randomized controlled trials and prospective cohort studies evaluating cognition in individuals receiving statins found that published data do not reveal an adverse effect of statins on cognition (165,166). Therefore, a concern that statins or other lipid-lowering agents might cause cognitive dysfunction or dementia is not currently supported by evidence and should not deter their use in individuals with diabetes at high risk for ASCVD (167).

## ANTIPLATELET AGENTS

> **Recommendations**  
> **10.33** Use aspirin therapy (75–162 mg/day) as a secondary prevention strategy in those with diabetes and a history of ASCVD. **A**  
> **10.34a** For individuals with ASCVD and documented aspirin allergy, clopidogrel (75 mg/day) should be used. **B**  
> **10.34b** The length of treatment with dual antiplatelet therapy using low-dose aspirin and a P2Y12 inhibitor in individuals with diabetes after an acute coronary syndrome, acute ischemic stroke, or transient ischemic attack should be determined by an interprofessional team approach that includes a cardiovascular or neurological specialist, respectively. **E**  
> **10.35** Combination therapy with 81 mg aspirin daily plus 2.5 mg rivaroxaban twice daily should be considered for individuals with stable coronary and/or peripheral artery disease (PAD) and low bleeding risk to prevent major adverse limb and cardiovascular events. **A**  
> **10.36** Aspirin therapy (75–162 mg/day) may be considered as a primary prevention strategy in those with diabetes who are at increased cardiovascular risk after a comprehensive discussion with the individual on the benefits versus the comparable increased risk of bleeding. **A**

### Risk Reduction

Aspirin has been shown to be effective in reducing cardiovascular morbidity and mortality in high-risk individuals with previous MI or stroke (secondary prevention) and is strongly recommended. In primary prevention, however, among individuals with no previous cardiovascular events, its net benefit is more controversial (156,168).

Previous randomized controlled trials of aspirin, specifically in people with diabetes, failed to consistently show a significant reduction in overall ASCVD end points, raising questions about the efficacy of aspirin for primary prevention in people with diabetes, although some sex differences were suggested (169–171).

The Antithrombotic Trialists’ Collaboration published an individual participant–level meta-analysis (172) of six large trials of aspirin for primary prevention in the general population. These trials collectively enrolled over 95,000 participants, including almost 4,000 with diabetes. Overall, they found that aspirin reduced the risk of serious vascular events by 12% (relative risk 0.88 [95% CI 0.82–0.94]). The largest reduction was for nonfatal MI, with little effect on CHD death (relative risk 0.95 [95% CI 0.78–1.15]) or total stroke.

Most recently, the ASCEND (A Study of Cardiovascular Events iN Diabetes) trial randomized 15,480 people with diabetes but no evident CVD to aspirin 100 mg daily or placebo (173). The primary efficacy end point was vascular death, MI, stroke, or transient ischemic attack. The primary safety outcome was major bleeding (i.e., intracranial hemorrhage, sight-threatening bleeding in the eye, gastrointestinal bleeding, or other serious bleeding). During a mean follow-up of 7.4 years, there was a significant 12% reduction in the primary efficacy end point (8.5% vs. 9.6%; *P* = 0.01). In contrast, major bleeding was significantly increased from 3.2 to 4.1% in the aspirin group (rate ratio 1.29; *P* = 0.003), with most of the excess being gastrointestinal bleeding and other extracranial bleeding. There were no significant differences by sex, weight, or duration of diabetes or other baseline factors, including ASCVD risk score.

Two other large, randomized trials of aspirin for primary prevention, in people without diabetes (ARRIVE [Aspirin to Reduce Risk of Initial Vascular Events]) (174) and in the elderly (ASPREE [Aspirin in Reducing Events in the Elderly]) (175), in which 11% of participants had diabetes, found no benefit of aspirin on the primary efficacy end point and an increased risk of bleeding. In ARRIVE, with 12,546 individuals over a period of 60 months of follow-up, the primary end point occurred in 4.29% vs. 4.48% of individuals in the aspirin versus placebo groups (HR 0.96 [95% CI 0.81–1.13]; *P* = 0.60). Gastrointestinal bleeding events (characterized as mild) occurred in 0.97% of individuals in the aspirin group vs. 0.46% in the placebo group (HR 2.11 [95% CI 1.36–3.28]; *P* = 0.0007). In ASPREE, which included 19,114 individuals, for CVD (fatal CHD, MI, stroke, or hospitalization for heart failure) after a median of 4.7 years of follow-up, the rates per 1,000 person-years were 10.7 vs. 11.3 events in aspirin vs. placebo groups (HR 0.95 [95% CI 0.83–1.08]). The rate of major hemorrhage per 1,000 person-years was 8.6 events versus 6.2 events, respectively (HR 1.38 [95% CI 1.18–1.62]; *P* < 0.001).

Thus, aspirin appears to have a modest effect on ischemic vascular events, with the absolute decrease in events depending on the underlying ASCVD risk. The main adverse effect is an increased risk of gastrointestinal bleeding. The excess risk may be as high as 5 per 1,000 per year in real-world settings. However, for adults with ASCVD risk >1% per year, the number of ASCVD events prevented will be similar to the number of episodes of bleeding induced, although these complications do not have equal effects on long-term health (176).

Recommendations for using aspirin as primary prevention include both men and women aged ≥50 years with diabetes and at least one additional major risk factor (hypertension, dyslipidemia, smoking, obesity, or CKD) who are not at increased risk of bleeding (e.g., older age, anemia, or kidney disease) (177–180). Noninvasive imaging techniques such as coronary calcium scoring may help further tailor aspirin therapy, particularly in those at low risk (181,182). For people >70 years of age (with or without diabetes), the balance appears to have greater risk than benefit (173,175). Thus, for primary prevention, the use of aspirin needs to be carefully considered and generally may not be recommended. Aspirin may be considered in the context of high cardiovascular risk with low bleeding risk but generally not in older adults. Aspirin therapy for primary prevention may be considered in the context of shared

2025  December 10 on guest by http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S216/848870/dc26s010.pdf Downloaded from


---



S230  Cardiovascular Disease and  Risk  Management     Diabetes Care Volume  49,  Supplement  1,  January  2026

decision-making, which carefully weighs the cardiovascular benefits against the increase in risk of bleeding.

For people with documented ASCVD, use of aspirin for secondary prevention has far greater benefit than risk; for this indication, aspirin is still recommended (168).

### Aspirin Use in People <50 Years of Age

Aspirin is not recommended for those at low risk of ASCVD (such as men and women aged <50 years with diabetes with no other major ASCVD risk factors), as the low benefit is likely to be outweighed by the risk of bleeding. Clinical judgment should be used for those at intermediate risk (younger individuals with one or more risk factors or older individuals with no risk factors) until further research is available. ASCVD risk factors include older age, hypertension, dyslipidemia, smoking, CKD, or obesity. Individuals’ willingness to undergo long-term aspirin therapy should also be considered in shared decision-making (183). Aspirin use in individuals aged <21 years is generally contraindicated due to the associated risk of Reye syndrome.

### Aspirin Dosing

Average daily dosages used in most clinical trials involving people with diabetes ranged from 50 to 650 mg but were mostly in the range of 100–325 mg/day. There is little evidence to support any specific dose, but using the lowest possible dose may help to reduce side effects (184). In the ADAPTABLE (Aspirin Dosing: A Patient-Centric Trial Assessing Benefits and Long-term Effectiveness) trial of individuals with established CVD, 38% of whom had diabetes, there were no significant differences in cardiovascular events or major bleeding between individuals assigned to 81 mg and those assigned to 325 mg aspirin daily (185). In the U.S., the most common low-dose tablet is 81 mg, and it appears that 75–162 mg/day is optimal.

### Indications for P2Y12 Receptor Antagonist Use

Combination dual antiplatelet therapy with aspirin and a P2Y12 receptor antagonist is indicated after acute coronary syndromes and coronary revascularization with stenting (186). Evidence supports use of either ticagrelor or clopidogrel if no percutaneous coronary intervention was performed (187). In people with diabetes and prior MI (1–3 years before), adding ticagrelor to aspirin significantly reduces the risk of recurrent ischemic events, including cardiovascular and CHD death (188). Similarly, the addition of ticagrelor to aspirin reduced the risk of ischemic cardiovascular events compared with aspirin alone in people with diabetes and stable coronary artery disease (189,190). However, a higher incidence of major bleeding, including intracranial hemorrhage, was noted with dual antiplatelet therapy. The net clinical benefit (ischemic benefit vs. bleeding risk) was improved with ticagrelor therapy in the large prespecified subgroup of individuals with history of percutaneous coronary intervention, while no net benefit was seen in individuals without prior percutaneous coronary intervention (190). However, early aspirin discontinuation compared with continued dual antiplatelet therapy after coronary stenting may reduce the risk of bleeding without a corresponding increase in the risks of mortality and ischemic events, as shown in a prespecified analysis of people with diabetes enrolled in the TWILIGHT (Ticagrelor With Aspirin or Alone in High-Risk Patients After Coronary Intervention) trial and a meta-analysis (191,192).

Current guidelines recommend short-term dual antiplatelet therapy after high-risk transient ischemic attack and minor stroke (193). The indications for dual antiplatelet therapy and length of treatment are rapidly evolving and should be determined by an interprofessional team approach that includes a cardiovascular or neurological specialist, as appropriate.

### Combination Antiplatelet and Anticoagulation Therapy

Combination therapy with aspirin plus low-dose rivaroxaban may be considered for people with stable coronary and/or PAD to prevent major adverse limb and cardiovascular complications. In the COMPASS (Cardiovascular Outcomes for People Using Anticoagulation Strategies) trial of 27,395 individuals with established coronary artery disease and/or PAD, aspirin plus rivaroxaban 2.5 mg twice daily was superior to aspirin plus placebo in the reduction of cardiovascular ischemic events, including major adverse limb events. The absolute benefits of combination therapy appeared larger in people with diabetes, who comprised 10,341 of the trial participants (194,195). A similar treatment strategy was evaluated in the Vascular Outcomes Study of ASA (acetylsalicylic acid) Along with Rivaroxaban in Endovascular or Surgical Limb Revascularization for Peripheral Artery Disease (VOYAGER PAD) trial (196), in which 6,564 individuals with PAD who had undergone revascularization were randomly assigned to receive rivaroxaban 2.5 mg twice daily plus aspirin or placebo plus aspirin. Rivaroxaban treatment in this group of individuals was also associated with a significantly lower incidence of ischemic cardiovascular events, including major adverse limb events. However, an increased risk of major bleeding was noted with rivaroxaban added to aspirin treatment in both COMPASS and VOYAGER PAD.

The risks and benefits of dual antiplatelet or antiplatelet plus anticoagulant treatment strategies should be thoroughly discussed with eligible individuals, and shared decision-making should be used to determine an individually appropriate treatment approach. This field of cardiovascular risk reduction is evolving rapidly, as are the definitions of optimal care for individuals with differing types and circumstances of cardiovascular complications.

## CARDIOVASCULAR DISEASE

### Screening

> **Recommendations**  
> **10.37a** In asymptomatic individuals, routine screening for coronary artery disease is not recommended, as it does not improve outcomes as long as ASCVD risk factors are treated. **A**  
> **10.37b** Consider investigations for coronary artery disease in the presence of any of the following: signs or symptoms of cardiac or associated vascular disease, including carotid bruits, transient ischemic attack, stroke, claudication, or PAD; or electrocardiographic abnormalities (e.g., pathological Q waves). **E**  
> **10.38a** Adults with diabetes are at increased risk for the development of asymptomatic cardiac structural or functional abnormalities (stage B heart failure) or symptomatic (stage C) heart failure. Consider screening adults with diabetes by measuring a natriuretic peptide (B-type natriuretic peptide [BNP] or N-terminal pro-BNP [NT-proBNP]) to facilitate prevention of stage C heart failure. **B**

2025  December 10 on guest by http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S216/848870/dc26s010.pdf Downloaded



---


diabetesjournals.org/care     Cardiovascular  Disease  and  Risk  Management  S231

**10.38b** In asymptomatic individuals with diabetes and abnormal natriuretic peptide levels, echocardiography is recommended to identify stage B heart failure. **A**  
**10.39** In asymptomatic individuals with diabetes and age ≥65 years, microvascular disease in any location, or foot complications or any end-organ damage from diabetes, screening for PAD with ankle-brachial index testing is recommended if a PAD diagnosis would change management. **B**

# Treatment

### Recommendations

**10.40a** Among people with type 2 diabetes who have established ASCVD or chronic kidney disease (CKD), a sodium–glucose cotransporter 2 (SGLT2) inhibitor or glucagon-like peptide 1 receptor agonist (GLP-1 RA) with demonstrated cardiovascular disease benefit is recommended as part of the comprehensive cardiovascular risk reduction and/or glucose-lowering treatment plans. **A**  
**10.40b** In people with type 2 diabetes and established ASCVD or multiple ASCVD risk factors, or CKD, an SGLT2 inhibitor with demonstrated cardiovascular benefit is recommended to reduce the risk of cardiovascular events. **A**  
**10.40c** In people with type 2 diabetes and established ASCVD or multiple risk factors for ASCVD, or CKD, a GLP-1 RA with demonstrated cardiovascular benefit is recommended to reduce the risk of cardiovascular events. **A**  
**10.40d** In people with type 2 diabetes and established ASCVD or multiple risk factors for ASCVD, combined therapy with an SGLT2 inhibitor with demonstrated cardiovascular benefit and a GLP-1 RA with demonstrated cardiovascular benefit may be considered for additive reduction of the risk of adverse cardiovascular and kidney events. **B**  
**10.41a** In people with type 2 diabetes and established heart failure with either preserved or reduced ejection fraction, an SGLT2 inhibitor (including SGLT1/2 inhibitor) with proven benefit in this population is recommended to reduce the risk of worsening heart failure and cardiovascular death. **A**

**10.41b** In people with type 2 diabetes and established heart failure with either preserved or reduced ejection fraction, an SGLT2 inhibitor with proven benefit in this population is recommended to improve quality of life. **A**  
**10.42** For individuals with type 2 diabetes and CKD with albuminuria treated with maximum tolerated doses of ACE inhibitor or ARB, recommend treatment with a nonsteroidal MRA with demonstrated benefit to improve cardiovascular outcomes and reduce the risk of CKD progression. **A**  
**10.43** In individuals with diabetes aged ≥55 years with established ASCVD or multiple ASCVD risk factors, ACE inhibitor or ARB therapy is recommended to reduce the risk of cardiovascular events. **A**  
**10.44a** In individuals with diabetes and asymptomatic (stage B) heart failure, an interprofessional approach to optimize guideline-directed medical therapy, which should include a cardiovascular disease specialist, is recommended to reduce the risk for progression to symptomatic (stage C) heart failure. **A**  
**10.44b** In individuals with diabetes and asymptomatic (stage B) heart failure, ACE inhibitors or ARBs and β-blockers are recommended to reduce the risk for progression to symptomatic (stage C) heart failure. **A**  
**10.44c** In individuals with type 2 diabetes and asymptomatic (stage B) heart failure or with high risk of or established cardiovascular disease, treatment with an SGLT inhibitor with proven heart failure prevention benefit **A** or a GLP-1 RA with heart failure prevention benefit **B** is recommended to reduce the risk of hospitalization for heart failure.  
**10.44d** In adults with type 2 diabetes, obesity, and symptomatic heart failure with preserved ejection fraction (HFpEF), the treatment plan should include a dual GIP/GLP-1 RA **A** or a GLP-1 RA **B** with demonstrated benefit for reduction in heart failure events.  
**10.44e** In adults with type 2 diabetes, obesity, and symptomatic HFpEF, the treatment plan should include a dual GIP/GLP-1 RA or a GLP-1 RA with demonstrated benefit for reduction in heart failure symptoms. **A**

**10.44f** In individuals with type 2 diabetes and CKD, recommend treatment with a nonsteroidal MRA with demonstrated benefit to reduce the risk of hospitalization for heart failure. **A**  
**10.44g** In individuals with diabetes, guideline-directed medical therapy for myocardial infarction and symptomatic stage C heart failure is recommended with ACE inhibitors or ARBs (including ARBs and neprilysin inhibitors), MRAs, β-blockers, and SGLT2 inhibitors. **A**  
**10.44h** In individuals with diabetes and symptomatic stage C heart failure with ejection fraction >40%, a nonsteroidal MRA with proven benefit in reducing worsening heart failure events is recommended. **A** A nonsteroidal MRA should not be used with an MRA.  
**10.45** In people with type 2 diabetes with stable heart failure, metformin may be continued for glucose lowering if eGFR remains >30 mL/min/1.73 m² but should be avoided in unstable or hospitalized individuals with heart failure. **B**  
**10.46** Educate individuals with diabetes who are at risk for developing diabetic ketoacidosis and who are treated with SGLT inhibition on the risks and signs of ketoacidosis and methods of risk mitigation management, provide them with appropriate tools for ketone measurement (i.e., serum β-hydroxybutyrate), and discourage a ketogenic eating pattern. **E**

# Cardiac Testing

Candidates for advanced or invasive cardiac testing include those with  
1) symptoms or signs of cardiac or vascular disease and  
2) an abnormal resting electrocardiogram (ECG). Exercise ECG testing without or with echocardiography may be used as the initial test. In adults with diabetes ≥40 years of age, measurement of coronary artery calcium is also reasonable for cardiovascular risk assessment. Pharmacologic stress echocardiography or nuclear imaging should be considered in individuals with diabetes in whom resting ECG abnormalities preclude exercise stress testing (e.g., left bundle branch block or ST-T abnormalities). In addition, individuals who require stress testing and are unable to exercise should undergo



---



S232  Cardiovascular Disease and  Risk  Management     Diabetes Care Volume  49,  Supplement  1,  January  2026

pharmacologic stress echocardiography or nuclear imaging.

## Screening Asymptomatic Individuals for Atherosclerotic Cardiovascular Disease

The screening of asymptomatic individuals with high ASCVD risk is not recommended, in part because these high-risk people should already be receiving intensive medical therapy—an approach that provides benefits similar to those of invasive revascularization (197,198). A randomized trial demonstrated no clinical benefit of routine screening with adenosine-stress radionuclide myocardial perfusion imaging in asymptomatic people with type 2 diabetes and normal ECGs (199). Another randomized study showed that routine screening with coronary computed tomography angiography did not reduce the composite rate of all-cause mortality, nonfatal MI, or unstable angina in asymptomatic people with type 1 or type 2 diabetes (200). Studies have also found that a risk factor–based approach to the initial diagnostic evaluation and subsequent follow-up for coronary artery disease fails to identify which people with type 2 diabetes who will have silent ischemia on screening tests (201,202).

Any benefit of noninvasive coronary artery disease screening methods, such as computed tomography calcium scoring, to identify subgroups for different treatment strategies remains unproven in asymptomatic people with diabetes, though research is ongoing. Coronary calcium scoring in asymptomatic people with diabetes may help in risk stratification (203,204) and provide reasoning for treatment intensification and/or guiding informed individual decision-making and willingness for medication initiation and participation. However, their routine use leads to radiation exposure and may result in unnecessary invasive testing, such as coronary angiography and revascularization procedures. The ultimate balance of benefit, cost, and risk of such an approach in asymptomatic individuals remains controversial, particularly in the modern setting of aggressive ASCVD risk factor management.

## Screening for Asymptomatic Heart Failure in People With Diabetes

People with diabetes are at an increased risk for developing heart failure, as shown in multiple longitudinal, observational studies (205,206). This association is not only observed in people with type 2 diabetes but also evident in people with type 1 diabetes (205,206). In a large multinational cohort of 750,000 people with diabetes without established CVD, heart failure and CKD were the most frequent first manifestations of cardiovascular or kidney disease (207). For a detailed review of screening, diagnosis, and treatment recommendations of heart failure in people with diabetes, the reader is further referred to the ADA report “Heart Failure: An Underappreciated Complication of Diabetes. A Consensus Report of the American Diabetes Association” (16).

People with diabetes are at particularly high risk for progression from asymptomatic stage A and B to symptomatic stage C and D heart failure (208,209). Identification, risk stratification, and early treatment of risk factors in people with diabetes and asymptomatic stages of heart failure reduce the risk for progression to symptomatic heart failure (210,211). In people with type 2 diabetes, measurement of natriuretic peptides, including B-type natriuretic peptide (BNP) or N-terminal pro-BNP (NT-proBNP), identifies people at risk for heart failure development, progression of symptoms, and heart failure–related mortality (212–214). A similar association and prognostic values of increased NT-proBNP with increased cardiovascular and all-cause mortality has been reported in people with type 1 diabetes (215). Results from several randomized controlled trials revealed that more intensive treatment of risk factors in people with increased levels of natriuretic peptides reduces the risk for symptomatic heart failure, heart failure hospitalization, and newly diagnosed left ventricular dysfunction (211,216,217).

Consider screening asymptomatic adults with diabetes for the development of cardiac structural or functional abnormalities (stage B heart failure) by measuring BNP or NT-proBNP. The biomarker threshold for abnormal values is BNP level ≥50 pg/mL and NT-proBNP level ≥125 pg/mL. Use clinical judgement when evaluating abnormal levels of natriuretic peptide and consider possible competing diagnoses that may lead to increased levels of natriuretic peptide, such as renal insufficiency, pulmonary hypertension, chronic obstructive lung disease, obstructive sleep apnea, ischemic and hemorrhagic stroke, and anemia. Conversely, natriuretic peptide levels may be decreased in people with obesity, which impairs sensitivity of testing.

In people with diabetes and an abnormal natriuretic peptide level, echocardiography is recommended as the next step to screen for structural heart disease and echocardiographic Doppler indices for evidence of diastolic dysfunction and increased filling pressures (218). At this stage, an interprofessional approach, which should include a CVD specialist, is recommended to implement a guideline-directed medical treatment strategy, which may reduce the risk of progression to symptomatic stages of heart failure (210). The recommendations for screening and treatment of heart failure in people with diabetes discussed in this section are consistent with the ADA consensus report on heart failure (16) and with current American Heart Association/American College of Cardiology/Heart Failure Society of America guidelines for the management of heart failure (219).

## Screening for Asymptomatic Peripheral Artery Disease in People With Diabetes

The risk for PAD in people with diabetes is higher than that in people without diabetes (220–222). In the PAD Awareness, Risk, and Treatment: New Resources for Survival (PARTNERS) program, 30% of people aged 50–69 years with a history of cigarette smoking or diabetes, or aged ≥70 years regardless of risk factors, had PAD (223). Similarly, in other screening studies, 26% of people with diabetes have been shown to have PAD (224), and diabetes increased the odds of having PAD by 85% (225). Notably, classical symptoms of claudication are uncommon, and almost half of people with newly diagnosed PAD were asymptomatic (223). Many individuals with PAD remain asymptomatic either because they limit physical activity to avoid claudication symptoms or because a comorbid condition prevents them from reaching a threshold of activity to provoke symptoms.

Risk factors associated with an increased risk for PAD in people with diabetes include age, smoking, hypertension, dyslipidemia, worse glycemic management, longer duration of diabetes, neuropathy, and retinopathy as well as a prior history of CVD (226,227). In addition, the presence of microvascular disease is associated with adverse outcomes in people with PAD, including an increased risk for future limb amputation (228,229). While

2025  December 10 on guest by http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S216/848870/dc26s010.pdf Downloaded from



---



diabetesjournals.org/care     Cardiovascular  Disease  and  Risk  Management  S233

a positive screening test for PAD in an asymptomatic population has been associated with increased cardiovascular event rates (230,231), prospective, randomized studies addressing whether screening for PAD in people with diabetes improves long-term limb outcomes and cardiovascular event rates are limited. In the randomized controlled Viborg Vascular (VIVA) trial, 50,156 participants, of whom approximately 10% had diabetes, were randomized to combined vascular screening for abdominal aortic aneurysm, PAD, and hypertension or to no screening. Although the number needed to invite for screening to prevent one death was close to 170, vascular screening was associated with increased pharmacologic therapy (antiplatelet, lipid-lowering, and antihypertensive therapy), reduced in-hospital time for PAD and coronary artery disease, and reduced mortality (232). Therefore, screening is recommended for asymptomatic PAD using ankle-brachial index in people with diabetes in whom a diagnosis of PAD may help further intensify pharmacologic therapies and improve cardiovascular and limb outcomes, such as the intensification of LDL-lowering therapies (233), the initiation of low-dose rivaroxaban therapy (234), or the initiation of GLP-1 RA, as recent clinical trial evidence supports a symptomatic benefit of GLP-1 RA in people with diabetes and PAD (235). These people include those with age ≥65 years, diabetes with duration ≥10 years, microvascular disease, clinical evidence of foot complications, or any end-organ damage from diabetes.

## Lifestyle and Pharmacologic Interventions

Intensive lifestyle intervention focusing on weight loss through decreased caloric intake and increased physical activity, as performed in the Look AHEAD (Action for Health in Diabetes) trial, may be considered for improving glucose management, fitness, and some ASCVD risk factors (236). Individuals at increased ASCVD risk should receive statin, ACE inhibitor, or ARB therapy if the individual has hypertension, and possibly aspirin, unless there are contraindications to a particular drug class.

Clear cardiovascular benefits exist for ACE inhibitor or ARB therapy in people with diabetes. The Heart Outcomes Prevention Evaluation (HOPE) study randomized 9,297 individuals aged ≥55 years with a history of vascular disease or diabetes plus one other cardiovascular risk factor to either ramipril or placebo. Ramipril significantly reduced cardiovascular and all-cause mortality, MI, and stroke (237). ACE inhibitors or ARB therapy also have well-established long-term benefit in people with diabetes and CKD or hypertension, and these agents are recommended for hypertension management in people with known ASCVD (particularly coronary artery disease) (66,67,238). People with type 2 diabetes and CKD should be considered for treatment with finerenone to reduce cardiovascular outcomes and the risk of CKD progression (239–242). β-Blockers should be used in individuals with active angina or HFrEF and for 3 years after MI in those with preserved left ventricular function (243,244).

## Glucose-Lowering Therapies and Cardiovascular Outcomes

In 2008, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) issued guidance for industry to perform cardiovascular outcomes trials for all new medications for the treatment of type 2 diabetes amid concerns of increased cardiovascular risk (245). Diabetes medications approved prior to 2008 were not subject to the guidance. This guidance was revised in May 2023 (246).

### SGLT2 Inhibitors

Results of large cardiovascular outcome trials of empagliflozin (10 mg or 25 mg daily) and canagliflozin (100 or 300 mg daily) showed that treatment with either drug reduced rates of MI, stroke, or cardiovascular death. While there was an increased risk of lower-limb amputation with canagliflozin in one trial (247), no significant increase in lower-limb amputations, fractures, AKI, or hyperkalemia was seen in other trials of canagliflozin (248). The major cardiovascular outcome trial of dapagliflozin (10 mg daily) did not show a reduction in the coprimary outcome of MI, stroke, or cardiovascular death but did show a significantly lower rate of the coprimary composite outcome of hospitalization for heart failure or cardiovascular death, which was driven by its effect on hospitalization for heart failure. Cardiovascular outcome trials of ertugliflozin and bexagliflozin have not demonstrated evidence of cardiovascular risk reduction (249,250).

### GLP-1 Receptor Agonists

Results of trials with the GLP-1 RAs liraglutide (once daily) and semaglutide, albiglutide, efpeglenatide, and dulaglutide (once weekly) have all shown evidence of a reduction in major atherosclerotic cardiovascular outcomes (MI, stroke, or cardiovascular death) (251–256). An oral formulation of semaglutide has also demonstrated cardiovascular benefit (257–259). Lixisenatide and extended-release exenatide were not superior to placebo with respect to the primary end point of cardiovascular outcomes (260) and therefore are not recommended for CVD risk reduction.

In summary, the numerous large randomized controlled trials report statistically significant reductions in cardiovascular events for three of the FDA-approved SGLT2 inhibitors (empagliflozin, canagliflozin, and dapagliflozin) and four FDA-approved GLP-1 RAs (liraglutide, albiglutide [although that agent was removed from the market for business reasons], semaglutide [subcutaneous and oral formulations], and dulaglutide). Cardiovascular outcome trials of the dual glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide (GIP)/GLP-1 RA tirzepatide are ongoing (261).

Meta-analyses of the trials reported to date suggest that GLP-1 RAs and SGLT2 inhibitors reduce risk of atherosclerotic major adverse cardiovascular events to a comparable degree in people with type 2 diabetes and established ASCVD (262,263). SGLT2 inhibitors and GLP-1RA also reduce risk of heart failure hospitalization and progression of kidney disease in people with established ASCVD, multiple risk factors for ASCVD, or albuminuric kidney disease (264,265). In people with type 2 diabetes and established ASCVD, multiple ASCVD risk factors, or CKD, an SGLT2 inhibitor with demonstrated cardiovascular benefit or a GLP-1 RA with demonstrated cardiovascular benefit or both is recommended to reduce the risk of major adverse cardiovascular events and/or heart failure hospitalization. Emerging data suggest that use of both classes of drugs will provide an additive cardiovascular and kidney outcomes benefit; thus, combination therapy with an SGLT2 inhibitor and a GLP-1 RA may be considered to provide the complementary outcomes benefits associated with these classes of medication (254), which are largely independent of glycemic management. The efficacy and safety of SGLT2 inhibitors for reduction of cardiovascular and kidney events in people with type 1 diabetes is being investigated and is not currently recommended due to a significant increase of

2025  December 10 on guest by http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S216/848870/dc26s010.pdf Downloaded from



---



Cardiovascular Disease and Risk Management    Diabetes Care Volume 49, Supplement 1, January 2026

diabetic ketoacidosis and euglycemic ketoacidosis (266).

Other Classes  
Cardiovascular outcomes trials of dipeptidyl peptidase 4 (DPP-4) inhibitors have not shown cardiovascular benefits relative to placebo. The CAROLINA (Cardiovascular Outcome Study of Linagliptin Versus Glimepiride in Type 2 Diabetes) study demonstrated noninferiority between a DPP-4 inhibitor, linagliptin, and a sulfonylurea, glimepiride, on cardiovascular outcomes despite lower rates of hypoglycemia in the linagliptin treatment group (267).

## Prevention and Treatment of Heart Failure

### Prevention of Symptomatic Heart Failure  
**ACE Inhibitors or ARBs and β-Blockers.** Early primary prevention strategies and treatment of associated risk factors reduce incident, symptomatic heart failure and should include lifestyle intervention with nutrition, physical activity, weight management, and smoking cessation (268–271) (**Fig. 10.5**). The vast majority of incident heart failure is preceded by hypertension; up to 91% of all new heart failure development in the Framingham cohort occurred in people with a previous diagnosis of hypertension (272). Therefore, management of hypertension constitutes a key goal in people with diabetes and stage A or B heart failure. For example, in the UK Prospective Diabetes Study (UKPDS) trial, intensive blood pressure management in people with type 2 diabetes reduced the risk for heart failure by 56% (273). Intensive treatment of hypertension in people with diabetes in the BPROAD trial led to a 34% reduction in treatment or hospitalization for heart failure (HR 0.66, 95% CI 0.41–1.04), a finding that parallels observations from the SPRINT trial where the risk for development of incident heart failure was reduced.

<table>
<thead>
<tr>
<th colspan="3">Symptomatic HF</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>No</td>
<td colspan="2">Yes</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="3">Is TTE available?</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>No</td>
<td colspan="2">Yes</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="1" rowspan="7">
Consider screening with <b>BNP/NT-proBNP</b>
<ul>
<li>SGLT2i<sup>1,4</sup></li>
<li>GLP-1 RA<sup>4</sup></li>
<li>If CKD present, consider nsMRA<sup>3</sup>, SGLT1/2i<sup>2</sup></li>
</ul>
</td>
<td colspan="2">
<b>HF prevention strategies</b>
<ul>
<li>SGLT2i<sup>1,4</sup></li>
<li>GLP-1 RA<sup>4</sup></li>
<li>If CKD present, consider nsMRA<sup>3</sup>, SGLT1/2i<sup>2</sup></li>
</ul>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="1">EF ≤40%</td>
<td colspan="1">EF >40%</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<ul>
<li>Refer to cardiology</li>
<li>β-Blocker with demonstrated benefit</li>
<li>ACEi or ARB</li>
</ul>
</td>
<td>
ACEi or ARB if HTN or CKD
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="3" style="text-align:center;">Is BNP ≥ 50 pg/mL or NT-proBNP ≥ 125 pg/mL?</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>No</td>
<td colspan="2">Yes</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
If CKD present, consider  
<ul>
<li>SGLT2i<sup>1</sup> or SGLT1/2i<sup>2</sup> with demonstrated benefit</li>
<li>nsMRA<sup>3</sup></li>
</ul>
</td>
<td colspan="2">Consider echocardiogram</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="3"></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="1" rowspan="6"></td>
<td>
<b>EF ≤40%</b><br>
<b>HFrEF GDMT</b>
<ul>
<li>Refer to cardiology</li>
<li>SGLT2i<sup>1</sup> or SGLT1/2i<sup>2</sup> with demonstrated benefit</li>
<li>ARNI or ACEi/ARB if ARNI not tolerated</li>
<li>β-Blocker with demonstrated benefit</li>
<li>MRA<sup>5</sup> with demonstrated benefit</li>
</ul>
</td>
<td>
<b>EF >40%</b><br>
<b>HFmrEF/HFpEF GDMT</b>
<ul>
<li>Refer to cardiology</li>
<li>SGLT2i<sup>1</sup> or SGLT1/2i<sup>2</sup> with demonstrated benefit</li>
<li>If obesity, GLP-1 RA or dual GIP/GLP-1 RA with demonstrated benefit</li>
<li>ACEi or ARB if hypertension, prior MI or CKD</li>
<li>nsMRA<sup>6</sup></li>
</ul>
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

----

### Footnotes

1. SGLT2i parameters: if eGFR ≥ 20 mL/min/1.73 m²  
2. SGLT1/2i can be used as an alternative to SGLT2i if eGFR ≥ 30 mL/min/1.73 m²  
3. If UACR ≥ 30 mg/g, K+ < 5.0 mEq/L (< 5.0 mmol/L)  
4. The absolute benefit of SGLT2i and GLP-1RA in preventing symptomatic HF will be greatest among those at the highest absolute risk.  
5. If eGFR ≥ 30 mL/min/1.73 m², K+ < 5.0 mEq/L (< 5.0 mmol/L)  
6. If eGFR ≥ 25 mL/min/1.73 m², K+ < 5.0 mEq/L (< 5.0 mmol/L)  

----

**Figure 10.5** — Overview of recommendations for the prevention and treatment of symptomatic heart failure in people with diabetes. ACEi, ACE inhibitor; ARB, angiotensin receptor blocker; ARNI, angiotensin receptor neprilysin inhibitor; BNP, B-type natriuretic peptide; NT-proBNP, N-terminal pro-B–type natriuretic peptide; CKD, chronic kidney disease; CVD, cardiovascular disease; EF, ejection fraction; eGFR, estimated glomerular filtration rate; GDMT, guideline-directed medical therapy; GIP/GLP-1 RA, glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide and glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor agonist; GLP-1 RA, glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor agonist; HF, heart failure; HFmrEF, heart failure with mildly reduced ejection fraction; HFpEF, heart failure with preserved ejection fraction; HFrEF, heart failure with reduced ejection fraction; HTN, hypertension; MI, myocardial infarction; MRA, mineralocorticoid receptor antagonist; nsMRA, nonsteroidal mineralocorticoid receptor antagonist; SGLT1/2i, sodium–glucose cotransporter 1 and 2 inhibitor; SGLT2i, sodium–glucose cotransporter 2 inhibitor; TTE, transthoracic echocardiography; UACR, urine albumin-to-creatinine ratio.

Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S216/848870/dc26s010.pdf by guest on 10 December 2025



---


diabetesjournals.org/care     Cardiovascular  Disease  and  Risk  Management  S235

failure decreased by 36% (42,274). As discussed in the **HYPERTENSION AND BLOOD PRESSURE MANAGEMENT** section above, use of ACE inhibitors or ARBs is the preferred treatment strategy for management of hypertension in people with diabetes, particularly in the presence of albuminuria or coronary artery disease. People with diabetes and stage B heart failure who remain asymptomatic but have evidence of structural heart disease, including history of MI, acute coronary syndrome, or left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) ≤40%, should be treated with ACE inhibitors or ARBs plus β-blockers according to current treatment guidelines (219). In the landmark Studies of Left Ventricular Dysfunction (SOLVD) study, in which 15% of people had diabetes, treatment with enalapril reduced incident heart failure in people with asymptomatic left ventricular dysfunction by 20% (275). In the Survival and Ventricular Enlargement (SAVE) study, which enrolled asymptomatic people with reduced LVEF after MI, including 23% people with diabetes, treatment with captopril reduced the development of heart failure by 37% (276). Subsequent retrospective analyses from both trials revealed that concomitant use of β-blockers was associated with decreased risk of progression to symptomatic heart failure (277,278). The Carvedilol Post-Infarct Survival Control in Left Ventricular Dysfunction (CAPRICORN) study randomized people with a history of MI and reduced LVEF to treatment with carvedilol (279). Approximately half of the study participants were asymptomatic, and 23% of study participants had a history of diabetes. Treatment with carvedilol reduced mortality by 23%, and there was a 14% risk reduction for heart failure hospitalization. Finally, in the Reversal of Ventricular Remodeling With Toprol-XL (REVERT) trial, in which 45% of the people enrolled had diabetes, metoprolol improved adverse cardiac remodeling in asymptomatic individuals with an LVEF <40% and mild left ventricular dilatation (280).

**SGLT Inhibitors.** SGLT2 inhibitors constitute a key treatment approach to reduce ASCVD and heart failure outcomes in people with diabetes. People with type 2 diabetes and increased cardiovascular risk or established CVD should be treated with an SGLT2 inhibitor to prevent the development of incident heart failure. In the EMPA-REG OUTCOME trial, only 10% of study participants had a prior history of heart failure, and treatment with empagliflozin reduced the relative risk for hospitalization from heart failure by 35% (281). In the CANVAS Program, hospitalization from heart failure was reduced by 33% in people allocated to canagliflozin, and only 14% of individuals enrolled had a prior history of heart failure (247). In the DECLARE-TIMI 58 study, only 10% of study participants had a prior history of heart failure, and dapagliflozin reduced cardiovascular mortality and hospitalization for heart failure by 17%, which was consistent across multiple study subgroups regardless of a prior history of heart failure (282). Finally, in the Effect of Sotagliflozin on Cardiovascular and Renal Events in Participants With Type 2 Diabetes and Moderate Renal Impairment Who Are at Cardiovascular Risk (SCORED) trial, randomization to the SGLT1/2 inhibitor sotagliflozin reduced the primary outcome of death from cardiovascular causes, hospitalizations for heart failure, and urgent visits for heart failure in people with type 2 diabetes, CKD, and risk for CVD (283). Therefore, SGLT inhibitor treatment is recommended in asymptomatic people with type 2 diabetes at risk or with established CVD to prevent incident heart failure and hospitalization from heart failure.

**GLP-1 Receptor Agonists.** A recently published meta-analysis of GLP-1 RA registration trials, including those for the commonly used medications dulaglutide, liraglutide, and semaglutide (both subcutaneous and oral), demonstrated a 14% relative reduction in the risk of hospitalization for heart failure (HR 0.86, 95% CI 0.79–0.93) (255). The trials included in these meta-analyses included people with type 2 diabetes and established ASCVD or at high risk for ASCVD but were not designed as trials of individuals with established heart failure. In addition, heart failure was a prespecified outcome of the randomized, placebo-controlled trial of semaglutide in people with type 2 diabetes and CKD and found a significant reduction in the risk of heart failure among those randomized to active semaglutide (284). Thus, there is sufficient evidence to recommend the use of GLP-1 RAs to prevent the development of heart failure in individuals with type 2 diabetes and risk factors for ASCVD. Individuals at even higher risk of heart failure, such as those with established ASCVD or CKD, are likely to see a larger absolute risk reduction than healthier individuals at relatively lower cardiovascular and kidney risk.

**Finerenone.** Finerenone is a nonsteroidal MRA and has recently been studied in people with diabetes and CKD, including the Finerenone in Reducing Kidney Failure and Disease Progression in Diabetic Kidney Disease (FIDELIO-DKD) and the Efficacy and Safety of Finerenone in Subjects With Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus and the Clinical Diagnosis of Diabetic Kidney Disease (FIGARO-DKD) studies. In FIDELIO-DKD, finerenone was compared with placebo for the primary outcome of kidney failure, a sustained decrease of at least 40% in the eGFR from baseline, or death from renal causes in people with type 2 diabetes and CKD (285). A prespecified secondary outcome was death from cardiovascular causes, nonfatal MI, nonfatal stroke, or hospitalization for heart failure, which was reduced by 13% in the finerenone group. The incidence of heart failure hospitalization occurred less in the finerenone-treated group, and only 7.7% of study participants had a prior history of heart failure. In the FIGARO-DKD trial, finerenone reduced the primary outcome of death from cardiovascular causes, nonfatal MI, nonfatal stroke, or hospitalization for heart failure (HR 0.87 [95% CI 0.76–0.98]; *P* = 0.03) in people with type 2 diabetes and CKD (240). Only 7.8% of all participants had a prior history of heart failure, and the incidence of hospitalization for heart failure was reduced in the finerenone-allocated treatment arm (HR 0.71 [95% CI 0.56–0.90]). Owing to these observations, treatment with finerenone is recommended in people with type 2 diabetes and CKD to reduce the risk of progression from stage A heart failure to symptomatic incident heart failure.

### Treatment of Symptomatic Heart Failure

In general, current guideline-directed medical therapy for a history of MI and symptomatic stage C and D heart failure in people with diabetes is similar to that for people without diabetes. At these symptomatic stages of heart failure, a collaborative approach with a cardiovascular specialist is recommended. The treatment recommendations are detailed in current 2022 American Heart Association/American College of Cardiology/Heart Failure

2025  December 10 on guest by http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S216/848870/dc26s010.pdf Downloaded from


---



S236  Cardiovascular Disease and Risk Management     Diabetes Care Volume 49, Supplement 1, January 2026

Society of America guidelines for the management of heart failure (12,13).

## SGLT Inhibitors

The SGLT2 inhibitors empagliflozin, canagliflozin, and dapagliflozin reduce the incidence of heart failure and improve heart failure–related outcomes, including hospitalization for heart failure and heart failure–related symptoms, in people with diabetes with preserved or reduced ejection fraction (242,247,248,281,286–294). The results of these clinical trials have been extensively outlined in the 2024 ADA “Standards of Care in Diabetes” (295). These results led to trials of empagliflozin and dapagliflozin in individuals with symptomatic heart failure (both HFrEF and HFpEF), often in populations with and without diabetes.

The DAPA-HF trial specifically evaluated the effects of dapagliflozin 10 mg daily on the primary outcome of a composite of worsening heart failure or cardiovascular death in individuals with New York Heart Association (NYHA) class II, III, or IV heart failure and an ejection fraction of 40% or less (287). Dapagliflozin treatment had a lower risk of the primary outcome (HR 0.74 [95% CI 0.65–0.85]), lower risk of first worsening heart failure event (HR 0.70 [95% CI 0.59–0.83]), and lower risk of cardiovascular death (HR 0.82 [95% CI 0.69–0.98]) compared with placebo. The effect of dapagliflozin on the primary outcome was consistent regardless of the presence or absence of type 2 diabetes (287). Similar results were obtained in clinical trials with empagliflozin (291).

In Empagliflozin Outcome Trial in Patients With Chronic Heart Failure With Preserved Ejection Fraction (EMPEROR-Preserved), the primary outcome of cardiovascular death or hospitalization for heart failure was reduced in adults with NYHA functional class I–IV and chronic HFpEF (LVEF >40%), extending the previously seen benefit in people with heart failure to those with preserved ejection fraction irrespective of the presence of type 2 diabetes (242). A similar benefit for heart failure outcomes was seen in the Dapagliflozin Evaluation to Improve the Lives of Patients with Preserved Ejection Fraction Heart Failure (DELIVER) trial for dapagliflozin in people with mildly reduced or preserved ejection fraction (290).

In the Effect of Sotagliflozin on Cardiovascular Events in Patients With Type 2 Diabetes Post Worsening Heart Failure (SOLOIST-WHF) trial, sotagliflozin, a combined SGLT1/2 inhibitor, initiated during or shortly after hospitalization for heart failure in people with diabetes, also reduced the risk for the primary end point of deaths from cardiovascular causes and hospitalizations and urgent visits for heart failure (296). A large meta-analysis (297) including the EMPEROR-Reduced, EMPEROR-Preserved, DAPA-HF, DELIVER, and SOLOIST-WHF trials included 21,947 individuals and demonstrated reduced risk for the composite of cardiovascular death or hospitalization for heart failure, cardiovascular death, first hospitalization for heart failure, and all-cause mortality. The findings on the studied end points were consistent in both trials of heart failure with mildly reduced or preserved ejection fraction and in all five trials combined. In addition to the hospitalization and mortality benefit in people with heart failure, SGLT2 inhibitors improve clinical stability and functional status in individuals with heart failure (289,292–294). Collectively, these studies indicate that SGLT2 inhibitors reduce the risk for heart failure hospitalization and cardiovascular death in a wide range of people with heart failure independently of glucose-lowering activity. Therefore, in people with type 2 diabetes and established HFpEF or HFrEF, an SGLT2 inhibitor with proven benefit in this population is recommended to reduce the risk of worsening heart failure and cardiovascular death. In addition, an SGLT2 inhibitor is recommended in this population to improve symptoms, physical limitations, and quality of life.

One concern with expanded use of SGLT inhibition is the infrequent but serious risk of diabetic ketoacidosis, including the atypical presentation of euglycemic ketoacidosis. While multiple pathways have been proposed to explain the propensity to excess ketone body production with SGLT2 inhibitors (e.g., increases in glucagon levels), generally the occurrence of other risk factors or situations is needed to precipitate the onset of diabetic ketoacidosis or euglycemic ketoacidosis, including, but not limited to, a systemic illness, insulin pump malfunctions, significant reduction in insulin doses, and prolonged periods of fasting or carbohydrate restriction. Although there were low rates of ketoacidosis in the cardiovascular and heart failure outcomes trials evaluating SGLT inhibition, these studies excluded individuals with type 1 diabetes and/or recent history of diabetic ketoacidosis (296,298). To decrease the risk of ketoacidosis when using SGLT inhibition in people with diabetes, it is recommended that clinicians assess the underlying susceptibility; provide education regarding the risks, symptoms, and prevention strategies; and prescribe home monitoring supplies for β-hydroxybutyrate (299,300). Assessment of susceptibility, education, and provision of monitoring supplies should reoccur throughout the duration of SGLT inhibitor treatment as core preventative strategies to minimize the risk of ketoacidosis (301,302).

## Mineralocorticoid Receptor Antagonists

Consistent with heart failure guidelines, an MRA like spironolactone or eplerenone is recommended in people with HFrEF (ejection fraction ≤40%) and type 2 diabetes (12,13).

The selective nonsteroidal MRA finerenone was examined in the Study to Evaluate the Efficacy (Effect on Disease) and Safety of Finerenone in Participants With Heart Failure and Left Ventricular Ejection Fraction (Proportion of Blood Expelled Per Heart Stroke) Greater or Equal to 40% (FINEARTS-HF) trial of people with symptomatic HFpEF (ejection fraction ≥40%) and was found to reduce the risk of total number of worsening heart failure events or cardiovascular death by 16% (rate ratio 0.84, 95% CI 0.74–0.95) (303). Of the enrolled participants, 41% had type 2 diabetes. Thus, finerenone improves cardiovascular and kidney outcomes in people with type 2 diabetes. Addition of finerenone can be considered to improve heart failure outcomes in individuals with symptomatic HFpEF. In people with type 2 diabetes and CKD with albuminuria treated with maximum tolerated doses of ACE inhibitor or ARB, the addition of finerenone should be considered to improve cardiovascular outcomes, including the risk for heart failure hospitalization, and to reduce the risk of CKD progression.

## GLP-1 RA and Dual GIP/GLP-1 RA

Increasing evidence has demonstrated the benefits of GLP-1 RA or dual GIP/GLP-1 RA on symptoms and outcomes for people with HFpEF and obesity, and while most people with HFpEF have obesity, approximately 45% have diabetes (304,305). The Semaglutide Treatment Effect in People with Obesity and HFpEF and Diabetes Mellitus (STEP-HFpEF DM) trial evaluated whether the GLP-1 RA semaglutide

2025 December 10 on guest by http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S216/848870/dc26s010.pdf Downloaded from



---



diabetesjournals.org/care    Cardiovascular Disease and Risk Management  S237

# Prevention of ASCVD¹ in people with type 2 diabetes

<table>
<thead>
<tr>
<th colspan="3">Nutrition and lifestyle<br>BP management</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td colspan="3" align="center">Does the individual have established ASCVD?</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td align="center" width="50%">Yes</td>
<td></td>
<td align="center" width="50%">No</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td align="center" colspan="3">
High-intensity statin²<br>GLP-1 RA<br>SGLT2i
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td align="center" colspan="3">Does the individual have ASCVD in at least two vascular beds, or one vascular bed and is &gt;65 years old?</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td align="center" width="50%">Yes</td>
<td></td>
<td align="center" width="50%">No</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
Consider aspirin 81 mg daily AND rivaroxaban 2.5 mg twice daily in individuals who do not need systemic anticoagulation or dual antiplatelet therapy and do not have another contraindication³
</td>
<td></td>
<td>
Aspirin 81 mg once daily OR clopidogrel 75 mg once daily
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td align="center" colspan="2">Is the individual at high ASCVD risk?⁴</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td align="center" width="50%">Yes</td>
<td align="center" width="50%">No</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td align="center" colspan="2">
High-intensity statin²<br>GLP-1 RA<br>SGLT2i
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td colspan="2" align="center">Moderate- or high-intensity statin²</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

1. ASCVD is defined as a history of an acute coronary syndrome or myocardial infarction, angina, coronary heart disease with or without revascularization, other arterial revascularization, stroke, or peripheral artery disease assumed to be atherosclerotic in origin.  
2. Non-statins with demonstrated benefit should be considered in those with statin intolerance.  
3. Consider low-dose rivaroxaban in people with atherosclerotic disease in at least two vascular beds, or in one bed and are older than 65 years, who do NOT have an increased risk of bleeding, recent (&lt;1 year) stroke, renal failure, LVEF &lt;30%, or need for dual antiplatelet therapy or systemic anticoagulation.  
4. Individuals at high risk for ASCVD include those with end-organ damage such as left ventricular hypertrophy or retinopathy or with multiple CV risk factors (e.g., older age, hypertension, smoking, dyslipidemia, CKD, and obesity).

> **Figure 10.6** — Approach to prevent ASCVD in people with type 2 diabetes. ASCVD, atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease; BP, blood pressure; CKD, chronic kidney disease; CV, cardiovascular; GLP-1 RA, glucagon-like peptide 1 receptor agonist; LVEF, left ventricle ejection fraction; SGLT2i, sodium–glucose cotransporter 2 inhibitor.

----

Improves symptoms related to heart failure in people with type 2 diabetes (306). In the study, 616 people with type 2 diabetes and a BMI of 30 or greater with HFpEF were assigned to receive once-weekly semaglutide at a dose of 2.4 mg or placebo. The primary end point was the change in the Kansas City Cardiomyopathy Questionnaire clinical summary score (KCCQ-CSS) (range from 0 to 100) and the change in weight. After 1 year of treatment, the mean change in the score was 13.7 points with semaglutide and 6.4 points with placebo, and the mean body weight was reduced by 9.8% in the group assigned to semaglutide compared with 3.4% with placebo. In addition, in the confirmatory secondary end point, semaglutide treatment improved 6-min walk distance. SUMMIT [A Study of Tirzepatide (LY3298176) in Participants With Heart Failure With Preserved Ejection Fraction (HFpEF) and Obesity] was a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial of tirzepatide, a dual GIP and GLP-1 RA, in individuals with established HFpEF and obesity (48% with diabetes). The coprimary outcomes were death from cardiovascular causes or a worsening heart failure event and a change in the KCCQ-CSS. Worsening heart failure or cardiovascular death was less frequent in individuals receiving tirzepatide (9.9% of individuals) versus placebo (15.3% of individuals; HR 0.62, 95% CI 0.41–0.95). In addition, the mean KCCQ-CSS improved significantly more in those on active tirzepatide (19.5) than in the placebo group (12.7) (307). Because of the results of these trials, treatment with a GLP-1 RA or GIP/GLP-1 RA for a reduction in heart failure events and heart failure symptoms in people with symptoms of heart failure is recommended.

## Other Glucose-Lowering Therapies in Heart Failure

Thiazolidinediones have a strong and consistent relationship with increased risk of heart failure (308,309) and should be avoided in people with heart failure. Metformin may be used for the management of hyperglycemia in people with stable heart failure as long as kidney function remains within the recommended range for use (310). DPP-4 inhibitors are generally considered safe to use in heart failure, though in The Saxagliptin Assessment of Vascular Outcomes Recorded in Patients with Diabetes Mellitus–Thrombolysis in Myocardial Infarction 53 (SAVOR-TIMI 53)  
 

2025 December 10 on guest by http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S216/848870/dc26s010.pdf Downloaded from



---


Cardiovascular Disease and Risk Management     Diabetes Care Volume 49, Supplement 1, January 2026

study, participants randomized to saxagliptin were more likely to be hospitalized for heart failure than those given placebo (311). However, three other cardiovascular outcomes trials—Examination of Cardiovascular Outcomes with Alogliptin versus Standard of Care (EXAMINE) (312), Trial Evaluating Cardiovascular Outcomes with Sitagliptin (TECOS) (313), and the Cardiovascular and Renal Microvascular Outcome Study With Linagliptin (CARMELINA) (314)—did not find a significant increase in risk of heart failure hospitalization with DPP-4 inhibitor use compared with placebo.

## Clinical Approach

As has been carefully outlined in **Fig. 9.4** in section 9, “Pharmacologic Approaches to Glycemic Treatment,” people with type 2 diabetes with or at high risk for ASCVD, heart failure, or CKD should be treated with a cardioprotective SGLT2 inhibitor and/or GLP-1 RA as part of the comprehensive approach to cardiovascular and kidney risk reduction. Importantly, these agents should be included in the plan of care irrespective of the need for additional glucose lowering and irrespective of metformin use. **Figure 10.6** outlines the approach to risk reduction with SGLT2 inhibitor and GLP-1 RA therapy in conjunction with other traditional, guideline-based preventive medical therapies for blood pressure, lipids, and glycemia and antiplatelet therapy.

Adoption of these agents should be reasonably straightforward in people with type 2 diabetes and established cardiovascular or kidney disease. Incorporation of SGLT2 inhibitor or GLP-1 RA therapy in the care of individuals with diabetes may need to replace some or all of their existing medications to minimize risks of hypoglycemia and adverse side effects and potentially to minimize medication costs. Close collaboration between primary and specialty care professionals and other members of the health care team (advanced practice professionals, pharmacists, nutritionists, and others) can help facilitate these transitions in clinical care and, in turn, improve outcomes for people with type 2 diabetes who are at high risk for ASCVD, heart failure, or CKD.

## References

1. Rawshani A, Rawshani A, Franzén S, et al. Mortality and cardiovascular disease in type 1 and type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med 2017;376:1407–1418  
2. Weng W, Tian Y, Kong SX, et al. The prevalence of cardiovascular disease and antidiabetes treatment characteristics among a large type 2 diabetes population in the United States. Endocrinol Diabetes Metab 2019;2:e00076  
3. Gæde P, Oellgaard J, Carstensen B, et al. Years of life gained by multifactorial intervention in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus and microalbuminuria: 21 years follow-up on the Steno-2 randomised trial. Diabetologia 2016;59:2298–2307  
4. Gaede P, Lund-Andersen H, Parving H-H, Pedersen O. Effect of a multifactorial intervention on mortality in type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med 2008;358:580–591  
5. Khunti K, Kosiborod M, Ray KK. Legacy benefits of blood glucose, blood pressure and lipid control in individuals with diabetes and cardiovascular disease: time to overcome multifactorial therapeutic inertia? Diabetes Obes Metab 2018;20:1337–1341  
6. Rawshani A, Rawshani A, Franzén S, et al. Risk factors, mortality, and cardiovascular outcomes in patients with type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med 2018;379:633–644  
7. Mohebi R, Chen C, Ibrahim NE, et al. Cardiovascular disease projections in the United States Based on the 2020 Census estimates. J Am Coll Cardiol 2022;80:565–578  
8. Kazemian P, Shebl FM, McCann N, Walensky RP, Wexler DJ. Evaluation of the cascade of diabetes care in the United States, 2005-2016. JAMA Intern Med 2019;179:1376–1385  
9. Nelson AJ, O’Brien EC, Kaltenbach LA, et al. Use of lipid-, blood pressure-, and glucose-lowering pharmacotherapy in patients with type 2 diabetes and atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease. JAMA Netw Open 2022;5:e2148030  
10. Gregg EW, Cheng YJ, Srinivasan M, et al. Trends in cause-specific mortality among adults with and without diagnosed diabetes in the USA: an epidemiological analysis of linked national survey and vital statistics data. Lancet 2018;391:2430–2440  
11. Kodama S, Fujihara K, Horikawa C, et al. Diabetes mellitus and risk of new-onset and recurrent heart failure: a systematic review and meta-analysis. ESC Heart Fail 2020;7:2146–2174  
12. Maddox TM, Januzzi JL, Jr, Allen LA, et al. 2024 ACC expert consensus decision pathway for treatment of heart failure with reduced ejection fraction: a report of the American College of Cardiology Solution Set Oversight Committee. J Am Coll Cardiol 83:1444–1488  
13. Kittleson MM, Panjrath GS, Amancherla K, et al. 2023 ACC expert consensus decision pathway on management of heart failure with preserved ejection fraction. J Am Coll Cardiol 2023;81:1835–1878  
14. Redfield MM, Borlaug BA. Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction: a review. JAMA 2023;329:827–838  
15. Marwick TH, Ritchie R, Shaw JE, Kaye D. Implications of underlying mechanisms for the recognition and management of diabetic cardiomyopathy. J Am Coll Cardiol 2018;71:339–351  
16. Pop-Busui R, Januzzi JL, Bruemmer D, et al. Heart failure: an underappreciated complication of diabetes. A consensus report of the American Diabetes Association. Diabetes Care 2022;45:1670–1690  
17. Ndumele CE, Neeland IJ, Tuttle KR, et al.; American Heart Association. A synopsis of the evidence for the science and clinical management of cardiovascular-kidney-metabolic (CKM) syndrome: a scientific statement from the American Heart Association. Circulation 2023;148:1636–1664  
18. Ndumele CE, Rangaswami J, Chow SL, et al.; American Heart Association. Cardiovascular-kidney-metabolic health: a presidential advisory from the American Heart Association. Circulation 2023;148:1606–1635  
19. Honigberg MC, Zekavat SM, Pirruccello JP, Natarajan P, Vaduganathan M. Cardiovascular and kidney outcomes across the glycemic spectrum: insights from the UK Biobank. J Am Coll Cardiol 2021;78:453–464  
20. Joseph JJ, Deedwania P, Acharya T, et al.; American Heart Association Diabetes Committee of the Council on Lifestyle and Cardiometabolic Health; Council on Arteriosclerosis, Thrombosis and Vascular Biology; Council on Clinical Cardiology; and Council on Hypertension. Comprehensive management of cardiovascular risk factors for adults with type 2 diabetes: a scientific statement from the American Heart Association. Circulation 2022;145:e722–e759  
21. Krentz A, Jacob S, Heiss C, et al.; International Cardiometabolic Working Group. Rising to the challenge of cardio-renal-metabolic disease in the 21st century: translating evidence into best clinical practice to prevent and manage atherosclerosis. Atherosclerosis 2024;396:118528  
22. Arnett DK, Blumenthal RS, Albert MA, et al. 2019 ACC/AHA guideline on the primary prevention of cardiovascular disease: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines. Circulation 2019;140:e596–e646  
23. Jones DW, Ferdinand KC, Taler SJ, et al. 2025 AHA/ACC/AANP/AAPA/ABC/ACCP/ACPM/AGS/AMA/ASPC/NMA/PCNA/SGIM guideline for the prevention, detection, evaluation and management of high blood pressure in adults: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Joint Committee on Clinical Practice Guidelines. Circulation 2025;152:e114–e218  
24. de Boer IH, Bangalore S, Benetos A, et al. Diabetes and hypertension: a position statement by the American Diabetes Association. Diabetes Care 2017;40:1273–1284  
25. Unger T, Borghi C, Charchar F, et al. 2020 International Society of Hypertension global hypertension practice guidelines. Hypertension 2020;75:1334–1357  
26. Whelton PK, Carey RM, Mancia G, Kreutz R, Bundy JD, Williams B. Harmonization of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association and European Society of Cardiology/European Society of Hypertension Blood Pressure/Hypertension Guidelines. Eur Heart J 2022;43:3302–3311  
27. Mancia G, Kreutz R, Brunstrom M, et al. 2023 ESH guidelines for the management of arterial hypertension The Task Force for the management of arterial hypertension of the European Society of Hypertension: endorsed by the International Society of Hypertension (ISH) and the European Renal Association (ERA). J Hypertens 2023;41:1874–2071  
28. Williams B, Mancia G, Spiering W, et al.; ESC Scientific Document Group. 2018 ESC/ESH



---

diabetesjournals.org/care     Cardiovascular  Disease  and  Risk  Management  S239

Guidelines  for  the  management  of  arterial                       patients  with  high  cardiovascular  risk  with  and               57. Bakris  GL, Weir  MR;  Study  of  Hypertension
hypertension. Eur Heart J 2018;39:3021–3104                          without  diabetes  or  previous  stroke:  an  open-                 and  the  Efficacy  of  Lotrel  in  Diabetes  (SHIELD)
29.        Ishigami J, Charleston J, Miller ER, Matsushita           label, blinded-outcome, randomised trial. Lancet                    Investigators.  Achieving  goal  blood  pressure  in
K,  Appel  LJ,  Brady  TM.  Effects  of  cuff  size  on  the         2024;404:245–255                                                    patients  with  type  2  diabetes:  conventional
accuracy  of  blood  pressure  readings:  the  Cuff(SZ)              44.    Wright  JT,  Jr, Williamson  JD, Whelton  PK, et             versus fixed-dose combination approaches. J Clin
randomized  crossover  trial.  JAMA  Intern  Med                     al.  A  randomized  trial  of  intensive  versus                    Hypertens (Greenwich) 2003;5:202–209
2023;183:1061–1068                                                   standard  blood-pressure  control.  N  Engl  J  Med                 58. Feldman RD, Zou GY, Vandervoort MK, Wong
30. Bobrie  G,  Genes  N, Vaur  L,  et  al.  Is  “isolated           2015;373:2103–2116                                                  CJ, Nelson SAE, Feagan BG. A simplified approach
home”  hypertension  as  opposed  to  “isolated                      45.    Cushman WC, Evans GW, Byington RP, et al.;                   to the treatment of uncomplicated hypertension: a
office” hypertension a sign of greater cardiovascular                ACCORD Study Group. Effects of intensive blood-                     cluster  randomized,  controlled  trial.  Hypertension
risk? Arch Intern Med 2001;161:2205–2211                             pressure  control  in  type  2  diabetes  mellitus.  N              2009;53:646–653
31. Sega  R,  Facchetti  R,  Bombelli  M,  et  al.                   Engl J Med 2010;362:1575–1585                                       59.      Webster  R,  Salam  A,  de  Silva  HA,  et  al.;
Prognostic  value  of  ambulatory  and  home  blood                  46.    Patel  A,  MacMahon  S,  Chalmers  J,  et  al.;              TRIUMPH  Study  Group.  Fixed  low-dose  triple
pressures compared with office blood  pressure in                    ADVANCE Collaborative Group. Effects of a fixed                     combination antihypertensive medication vs usual
the general population: follow-up results from the                   combination  of  perindopril  and  indapamide  on                   care  for  blood  pressure  control  in  patients  with
Pressioni Arteriose Monitorate e Loro Associazioni                   macrovascular  and  microvascular  outcomes  in                     mild  to  moderate  hypertension  in  sri  lanka:  a
(PAMELA) study. Circulation 2005;111:1777–1783                       patients  with  type  2  diabetes  mellitus  (the                   randomized clinical trial. JAMA 2018;320:566–579
32.                Panagiotakos D, Antza C, Kotsis V. Ambulatory     ADVANCE  trial):  a  randomised  controlled  trial.                 60.             Choudhry NK, Kronish IM, Vongpatanasin W,
and  home  blood  pressure  monitoring  for  cardio-                 Lancet 2007;370:829–840                                             et  al.;  American  Heart  Association  Council  on
vascular  disease  risk  evaluation:  a  systematic                  47.    Hansson L, Zanchetti A, Carruthers SG, et al.                Hypertension;  Council  on  Cardiovascular  and
review  and  meta-analysis  of  prospective  cohort                  Effects of intensive blood-pressure lowering and                    Stroke  Nursing;  Council  on  Clinical  Cardiology.
studies. J Hypertens 2024;42:1–9                                     low-dose  aspirin  in  patients  with  hypertension:                Medication  adherence  and  blood                pressure
33.     Omboni  S,  Gazzola  T,  Carabelli  G,  Parati  G.           principal  results  of  the  Hypertension  Optimal                  control: a scientific statement from the American
Clinical usefulness and cost effectiveness of home                   Treatment  (HOT)  randomised  trial.  HOT  Study                    Heart Association. Hypertension 2022;79:e1–e14
blood  pressure  telemonitoring:  meta-analysis  of                  Group. Lancet 1998;351:1755–1762                                    61.       Wang N, Rueter P, Atkins E, et al. Efficacy and
randomized  controlled  studies.  J  Hypertens  2013;                48.    de   Boer  IH,   Bakris   G,  Cannon                 CP.     safety of low-dose triple and quadruple combination
31:455–467                                                           Individualizing blood pressure targets for people                   pills vs monotherapy, usual care, or placebo for the
34.              Emdin  CA,  Rahimi  K,  Neal  B,  Callender  T,     with  diabetes  and  hypertension:  comparing  the                  initial  management  of  hypertension:  a  systematic
Perkovic  V,  Patel  A.  Blood  pressure  lowering  in               ADA and the ACC/AHA recommendations. JAMA                           review  and  meta-analysis.  JAMA  Cardiol  2023;8:
type  2  diabetes:  a  systematic  review  and  meta-                2018;319:1319–1320                                                  606–611
analysis. JAMA 2015;313:603–615                                      49.             Basu  S,  Sussman  JB,  Rigdon  J,  Steimle  L,     62. Ichikawa D, Kawarazaki W, Saka S, et al. Efficacy
35.                 Arguedas  JA,  Leiva  V,  Wright  JM.  Blood     Denton  BT,  Hayward  RA.  Benefit  and  harm  of                   of  renin-angiotensin  system  inhibitors,  calcium
pressure targets for hypertension in people with                     intensive  blood  pressure  treatment:  derivation                  channel  blockers,  and  diuretics  in  hypertensive
diabetes  mellitus.  Cochrane  Database  Syst  Rev                   and validation of risk models using data from the                   patients with diabetes: subgroup analysis based on
2013;2013:CD008277                                                   SPRINT  and  ACCORD  trials.  PLoS  Med  2017;14:                   albuminuria  in  a  systematic  review  and  meta-
36.     Ettehad  D,  Emdin  CA,  Kiran  A,  et  al.  Blood           e1002410                                                            analysis. Hypertens Res 2025;48:1880–1890
pressure lowering for prevention of cardiovascular                   50.           Phillips  RA,  Xu  J,  Peterson  LE,  Arnold  RM,     63. Barzilay  JI,  Davis  BR,  Bettencourt  J,  et  al.;
disease and death: a systematic review and meta-                     Diamond  JA,  Schussheim  AE.  Impact  of  cardiov-                 ALLHAT  Collaborative  Research  Group.  Cardio-
analysis. Lancet 2016;387:957–967                                    ascular  risk on  the  relative  benefit  and  harm  of             vascular outcomes using doxazosin vs. chlorthalidone
37. Brunstrom  M,     Carlberg       B.   Effect  of                 intensive  treatment  of  hypertension.  J  Am  Coll                for  the  treatment  of  hypertension  in  older  adults
antihypertensive treatment at different blood                        Cardiol 2018;71:1601–1610                                           with  and  without  glucose  disorders:  a  report  from
pressure  levels  in  patients  with  diabetes  mellitus:            51.              Blood Pressure Lowering  Treatment  Trialists’     the  ALLHAT  study.  J  Clin  Hypertens  (Greenwich)
systematic  review  and  meta-analyses.  BMJ  2016;                  Collaboration.  Blood  pressure-lowering  treatment                 2004;6:116–125
352:i717                                                             based  on  cardiovascular  risk:  a  meta-analysis  of              64.       Weber  MA,  Bakris  GL,  Jamerson  K,  et  al.;
38.                 Bangalore S, Kumar S, Lobach I, Messerli FH.     individual patient data. Lancet 2014;384:591–598                    ACCOMPLISH  Investigators.  Cardiovascular  events
Blood  pressure  targets  in  subjects  with  type  2                52.    Sacks  FM,  Svetkey  LP,  Vollmer  WM,  et  al.;             during differing hypertension therapies in patients
diabetes     mellitus/impaired      fasting             glucose:     DASH-Sodium Collaborative Research Group. Effects                   with diabetes. J Am Coll Cardiol 2010;56:77–85
observations  from  traditional  and  Bayesian                       on  blood  pressure  of  reduced  dietary  sodium  and              65. Heart   Outcomes   Prevention              Evaluation
random-effects  meta-analyses  of  randomized                        the dietary approaches to stop hypertension (DASH)                  (HOPE) Study Investigators. Effects of ramipril on
trials. Circulation 2011;123:2799–2810                               diet. DASH-Sodium Collaborative Research Group. N                   cardiovascular  and  microvascular  outcomes  in
39.                Thomopoulos C, Parati G, Zanchetti A. Effects     Engl J Med 2001;344:3–10                                            people with diabetes mellitus: results of the HOPE
of blood-pressure-lowering treatment on outcome                      53.    James  PA,  Oparil  S,  Carter  BL,  et  al.  2014           study and MICRO-HOPE substudy. Heart Outcomes
incidence  in  hypertension:  10  -  Should  blood                   evidence-based guideline for the management of                      Prevention  Evaluation  Study  Investigators.  Lancet
pressure    management  differ      in              hypertensive     high  blood  pressure  in  adults:  report  from  the               2000;355:253–259
patients  with  and  without  diabetes  mellitus?                    panel  members  appointed  to  the  Eighth  Joint                   66.      Arnold  SV,  Bhatt  DL,  Barsness  GW,  et  al.;
Overview and meta-analyses of randomized trials.                     National  Committee  (JNC  8).  JAMA  2014;311:                     American  Heart  Association  Council  on  Lifestyle
J Hypertens 2017;35:922–944                                          507–520                                                             and  Cardiometabolic  Health  and  Council  on
40.           Xie X, Atkins E, Lv J, et al. Effects of intensive     54.    Guo  R,  Li  N,  Yang  R,  et  al.  Effects  of  the         Clinical Cardiology. Clinical management of stable
blood  pressure  lowering  on  cardiovascular  and                   modified  DASH  diet  on  adults  with  elevated                    coronary  artery  disease  in  patients  with  type  2
renal  outcomes: updated systematic review and                       blood  pressure  or  hypertension:  a  systematic                   diabetes mellitus: a scientific statement from the
meta-analysis. Lancet 2016;387:435–443                               review  and  meta-analysis.  Front  Nutr  2021;8:                   American Heart Association. Circulation 2020;141:
41. Zhang W, Zhang S, Deng Y, et al.; STEP Study                     725020                                                              e779–e806
Group. Trial of intensive blood-pressure control in                  55.             Mao  Y,  Lin  W, Wen  J,  Chen  G.  Impact  and     67.       Yusuf S, Teo K, Anderson C, et al.; Telmisartan
older  patients  with  hypertension.  N  Engl  J  Med                efficacy  of  mobile  health  intervention  in  the                 Randomised  AssessmeNt  Study  in  ACE  iNtolerant
2021;385:1268–1279                                                   management  of  diabetes  and  hypertension:  a                     subjects with cardiovascular Disease (TRANSCEND)
42.          Bi  Y,  Li  M,  Liu  Y,  et  al.;  BPROAD  Research     systematic review and  meta-analysis.  BMJ  Open                    Investigators.  Effects  of  the  angiotensin-receptor
Group. Intensive blood-pressure control in patients                  Diabetes Res Care 2020;8:e001225                                    blocker telmisartan on cardiovascular events in high-
with  type  2  diabetes.  N  Engl  J  Med  2025;392:                 56.    Stogios  N,  Kaur  B,  Huszti  E,  Vasanthan  J,             risk  patients  intolerant  to  angiotensin-converting
1155–1167                                                            Nolan  RP.  Advancing  digital  health  interventions               enzyme  inhibitors:  a  randomised  controlled  trial.
43.     Liu  J,  Li  Y,  Ge  J,  et  al.;  ESPRIT  Collaborative     as  a  clinically  applied  science  for  blood  pressure           Lancet 2008;372:1174–1183
Group.  Lowering  systolic  blood  pressure  to  less                reduction: a systematic review and meta-analysis.                   68. Qiao  Y,  Shin  J-I,  Chen  TK,  et  al.  Association
than 120 mm Hg versus less than 140 mm Hg in                         Can J Cardiol 2020;36:764–774                                       between    renin-angiotensin  system  blockade

2025  December
      10 on  guest
                by     http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S216/848870/dc26s010.pdf
                       from   Downloaded

---



S240  Cardiovascular Disease and Risk Management     Diabetes Care Volume 49, Supplement 1, January 2026

discontinuation and all-cause mortality among persons with low estimated glomerular filtration rate. JAMA Intern Med 2020;180:718–726  
69. Reinhart M, Puil L, Salzwedel DM, Wright JM. First-line diuretics versus other classes of antihypertensive drugs for hypertension. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2023;7:CD008161  
70. Carlberg B, Samuelsson O, Lindholm LH. Atenolol in hypertension: is it a wise choice? Lancet 2004;364:1684–1689  
71. Murphy SP, Ibrahim NE, Januzzi JL, Jr. Heart failure with reduced ejection fraction: a review. JAMA 2020;324:488–504  
72. Garovic VD, Dechend R, Easterling T, et al.; American Heart Association Council on Hypertension; Council on the Kidney in Cardiovascular Disease, Kidney in Heart Disease Science Committee; Council on Arteriosclerosis, Thrombosis and Vascular Biology; Council on Lifestyle and Cardiometabolic Health; Council on Peripheral Vascular Disease; and Stroke Council. Hypertension in pregnancy: diagnosis, blood pressure goals, and pharmacotherapy: a scientific statement from the American Heart Association. Hypertension 2022;79:e21–e41  
73. Irgens HU, Reisaeter L, Irgens LM, Lie RT. Long term mortality of mothers and fathers after pre-eclampsia: population based cohort study. BMJ 2001;323:1213–1217  
74. Yusuf S, Teo KK, Pogue J, et al.; ONTARGET Investigators. Telmisartan, ramipril, or both in patients at high risk for vascular events. N Engl J Med 2008;358:1547–1559  
75. Fried LF, Emanuele N, Zhang JH, et al.; VA NEPHRON-D Investigators. Combined angiotensin inhibition for the treatment of diabetic nephropathy. N Engl J Med 2013;369:1892–1903  
76. Makani H, Bangalore S, Desouza KA, Shah A, Messerli FH. Efficacy and safety of dual blockade of the renin-angiotensin system: meta-analysis of randomised trials. BMJ 2013;346:f360  
77. Nilsson E, Gasparini A, Ärnlöv J, et al. Incidence and determinants of hyperkalemia and hypokalemia in a large healthcare system. Int J Cardiol 2017;245:277–284  
78. Bandak G, Sang Y, Gasparini A, et al. Hyperkalemia after initiating renin-angiotensin system blockade: the Stockholm Creatinine Measurements (SCREAM) project. J Am Heart Assoc 2017;6:e005428  
79. Bakris GL, Weir MR. Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor-associated elevations in serum creatinine: is this a cause for concern? Arch Intern Med 2000;160:685–693  
80. Ostermann M, Bellomo R, Burdmann EA, et al.; Conference Participants. Controversies in acute kidney injury: conclusions from a Kidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes (KDIGO) Conference. Kidney Int 2020;98:294–309  
81. James MT, Grams ME, Woodward M, et al.; CKD Prognosis Consortium. A meta-analysis of the association of estimated GFR, albuminuria, diabetes mellitus, and hypertension with acute kidney injury. Am J Kidney Dis 2015;66:602–612  
82. Williams B, MacDonald TM, Morant S, et al.; British Hypertension Society’s PATHWAY Studies Group. Spironolactone versus placebo, bisoprolol, and doxazosin to determine the optimal treatment for drug-resistant hypertension (PATHWAY-2): a randomised, double-blind, crossover trial. Lancet 2015;386:2059–2068  
83. Sato A, Hayashi K, Naruse M, Saruta T. Effectiveness of aldosterone blockade in patients with diabetic nephropathy. Hypertension 2003;41:64–68  

84. Mehdi UF, Adams-Huet B, Raskin P, Vega GL, Toto RD. Addition of angiotensin receptor blockade or mineralocorticoid antagonism to maximal angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibition in diabetic nephropathy. J Am Soc Nephrol 2009;20:2641–2650  
85. Bakris GL, Agarwal R, Chan JC, et al.; Mineralocorticoid Receptor Antagonist Tolerability Study–Diabetic Nephropathy (ARTS-DN) Study Group. Effect of finerenone on albuminuria in patients with diabetic nephropathy: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA 2015;314:884–894  
86. Virani SS, Newby LK, Arnold SV, et al. 2023 AHA/ACC/ACCP/ASPC/NLA/PCNA guideline for the management of patients with chronic coronary disease: a report of the American Heart Association/American College of Cardiology Joint Committee on Clinical Practice Guidelines. Circulation 2023;148:e9–e119  
87. Estruch R, Ros E, Salas-Salvadó J, et al.; PREDIMED Study Investigators. Primary prevention of cardiovascular disease with a mediterranean diet supplemented with extra-virgin olive oil or nuts. N Engl J Med 2018;378:e34  
88. Jia X, Al Rifai M, Ramsey DJ, et al. Association between lipid testing and statin adherence in the Veterans Affairs health system. Am J Med 2019;132:e693–e700  
89. Rana JS, Virani SS, Moffet HH, et al. Association of low-density lipoprotein testing after an atherosclerotic cardiovascular event with subsequent statin adherence and intensification. Am J Med 2022;135:603–606  
90. Tran C, Vo V, Taylor P, Koehn DA, Virani SS, Dixon DL. Adherence to lipid monitoring and its impact on treat intensification of LDL-C lowering therapies at an urban academic medical center. J Clin Lipidol 2022;16:491–497  
91. Meek C, Wierzbicki AS, Jewkes C, et al. Daily and intermittent rosuvastatin 5 mg therapy in statin intolerant patients: an observational study. Curr Med Res Opin 2012;28:371–378  
92. Fulcher J, O’Connell R, Voysey M, et al. Efficacy and safety of LDL-lowering therapy among men and women: meta-analysis of individual data from 174,000 participants in 27 randomised trials. Lancet 2015;385:1397–1405  
93. Mihaylova B, Emberson J, Blackwell L, et al. The effects of lowering LDL cholesterol with statin therapy in people at low risk of vascular disease: meta-analysis of individual data from 27 randomised trials. Lancet 2012;380:581–590  
94. Pyörälä K, Pedersen TR, Kjekshus J, Faergeman O, Olsson AG, Thorgeirsson G. Cholesterol lowering with simvastatin improves prognosis of diabetic patients with coronary heart disease. A subgroup analysis of the Scandinavian Simvastatin Survival Study (4S). Diabetes Care 1997;20:614–620  
95. Collins R, Armitage J, Parish S, Sleigh P, Peto R; Heart Protection Study Collaborative Group. MRC/BHF Heart Protection Study of cholesterol-lowering with simvastatin in 5963 people with diabetes: a randomised placebo-controlled trial. Lancet 2003;361:2005–2016  
96. Goldberg RB, Mellies MJ, Sacks FM, et al. Cardiovascular events and their reduction with pravastatin in diabetic and glucose-intolerant myocardial infarction survivors with average cholesterol levels: subgroup analyses in the cholesterol and recurrent events (CARE) trial. The Care Investigators. Circulation 1998;98:2513–2519  
97. Shepherd J, Barter P, Carmena R, et al. Effect of lowering LDL cholesterol substantially below currently recommended levels in patients with coronary heart disease and diabetes: the Treating to New Targets (TNT) study. Diabetes Care 2006;29:1220–1226  
98. Sever PS, Poulter NR, Dahlöf B, et al. Reduction in cardiovascular events with atorvastatin in 2,532 patients with type 2 diabetes: Anglo-Scandinavian Cardiac Outcomes Trial–lipid-lowering arm (ASCOT-LLA). Diabetes Care 2005;28:1151–1157  
99. Knopp RH, d’Emden M, Smilde JG, Pocock SJ. Efficacy and safety of atorvastatin in the prevention of cardiovascular end points in subjects with type 2 diabetes: the Atorvastatin Study for Prevention of Coronary Heart Disease Endpoints in non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (ASPEN). Diabetes Care 2006;29:1478–1485  
100. Colhoun HM, Betteridge DJ, Durrington PN, et al.; CARDS investigators. Primary prevention of cardiovascular disease with atorvastatin in type 2 diabetes in the Collaborative Atorvastatin Diabetes Study (CARDS): multicentre randomised placebo-controlled trial. Lancet 2004;364:685–696  
101. Kearney PM, Blackwell L, Collins R, et al.; Cholesterol Treatment Trialists’ (CTT) Collaborators. Efficacy of cholesterol-lowering therapy in 18,686 people with diabetes in 14 randomised trials of statins: a meta-analysis. Lancet 2008;371:117–125  
102. Taylor F, Huffman MD, Macedo AF, et al. Statins for the primary prevention of cardiovascular disease. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2013;2013:CD004816  
103. Carter AA, Gomes T, Camacho X, Juurlink DN, Shah BR, Mamdani MM. Risk of incident diabetes among patients treated with statins: population based study. BMJ 2013;346:f2610  
104. Baigent C, Keech A, Kearney PM, et al.; Cholesterol Treatment Trialists’ (CTT) Collaborators. Efficacy and safety of cholesterol-lowering treatment: prospective meta-analysis of data from 90,056 participants in 14 randomised trials of statins. Lancet 2005;366:1267–1278  
105. Mangione CM, Barry MJ, Nicholson WK, et al.; US Preventive Services Task Force. Statin use for the primary prevention of cardiovascular disease in adults: US Preventive Services Task Force recommendation statement. JAMA 2022;328:746–753  
106. Grundy SM, Stone NJ, Bailey AL, et al. AHA/ACC/AACVPR/AAPA/ABC/ACPM/ADA/AGS/APhA/ASPC/NLA/PCNA guideline on the management of blood cholesterol: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines. Circulation 2018;139:e1082–e1143  
107. Jellinger PS, Handelsman Y, Rosenblit PD, et al. American Association of Clinical Endocrinologists and American College of Endocrinology guidelines for management of dyslipidemia and prevention of cardiovascular disease. Endocr Pract 2017;23:1–87  
108. Goldberg RB, Stone NJ, Grundy SM. The 2018 AHA/ACC/AACVPR/AAPA/ABC/ACPM/ADA/AGS/APhA/ASPC/NLA/PCNA guidelines on the management of blood cholesterol in diabetes. Diabetes Care 2020;43:1673–1678  
109. Mach F, Baigent C, Catapano AL, et al.; ESC Scientific Document Group. 2019 ESC/EAS guidelines for the management of dyslipidaemias:  

2025 December 10 on guest by http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S216/848870/dc26s010.pdf Downloaded from

