

3. PREVENTION OR DELAY OF DIABETES

# 3. Prevention or Delay of Diabetes and Associated Comorbidities: Standards of Care in Diabetes—2026  
*Diabetes Care 2026;49(Suppl. 1):S50–S60 | https://doi.org/10.2337/dc26-S003*  

_American Diabetes Association_  
_Professional Practice Committee for Diabetes_*

The American Diabetes Association (ADA) “Standards of Care in Diabetes” includes the ADA’s current clinical practice recommendations and is intended to provide the components of diabetes care, general treatment goals and guidelines, and tools to evaluate quality of care. Members of the ADA Professional Practice Committee for Diabetes, an interprofessional expert committee, are responsible for updating the Standards of Care annually, or more frequently as warranted. For a detailed description of ADA standards, statements, and reports, as well as the evidence-grading system for ADA’s clinical practice recommendations and a full list of Professional Practice Committee members, please refer to Introduction and Methodology. Readers who wish to comment on the Standards of Care are invited to do so at professional.diabetes.org/SOC.

For guidelines related to screening for increased risk for type 1 diabetes, prediabetes and type 2 diabetes, and other forms of diabetes, please refer to section 2, “Diagnosis and Classification of Diabetes.” For guidelines related to screening, diagnosis, and management of diabetes in children and adolescents, please refer to section 14, “Children and Adolescents.”

> **Recommendations**  
> **3.1** In people with prediabetes, monitor for the development of diabetes at least annually; modify frequency of testing based on individual risk assessment. **E**  
> **3.2** In people with presymptomatic type 1 diabetes, monitor for disease progression using A1C approximately every 6 months and 75-g oral glucose tolerance test (i.e., fasting and 2-h plasma glucose) annually; modify frequency of monitoring and consider augmenting with other glycemic assessment tools such as continuous glucose monitoring metrics based on individual risk assessment incorporating age, number and type of autoantibodies, and glycemic metrics. **E**

Screening for prediabetes (which refers to hyperglycemia preceding the diagnosis of type 2 diabetes only) and type 2 diabetes risk through an assessment of risk factors (**Table 2.5**) or with an assessment tool, such as the American Diabetes Association risk test, which can be used by either a layperson or a health care professional (diabetes.org/diabetes-risk-test), is recommended to guide whether to perform a diagnostic test for prediabetes (**Table 2.2**) and type 2 diabetes (**Table 2.1**) (see section 2, “Diagnosis and Classification of Diabetes”). Testing high-risk individuals for prediabetes is warranted because the laboratory assessment is safe and reasonable.

----

*A complete list of members of the American Diabetes Association Professional Practice Committee for Diabetes can be found at https://doi.org/10.2337/dc26-SINT.*

*Duality of interest information for each contributor is available at https://doi.org/10.2337/dc26-SDIS.*

*Suggested citation: American Diabetes Association Professional Practice Committee for Diabetes. 3. Prevention or delay of diabetes and associated comorbidities: Standards of Care in Diabetes—2026. Diabetes Care 2026;49(Suppl. 1):S50–S60*

© 2025 by the American Diabetes Association. Readers may use this work for educational, noncommercial purposes if properly cited and unaltered. The version of record may be linked at https://diabetesjournals.org/care, but ADA permission is required to post this work on any third-party site or platform. This publication and its contents may not be reproduced, distributed, or used for text or data mining, machine learning, or similar technologies without prior written permission. Requests to reuse, adapt, or distribute this work may be sent to permissions@diabetes.org. More information is available at https://diabetesjournals.org/journals/pages/license.



---


diabetesjournals.org/care     Prevention or Delay of Diabetes  S51

in cost, and early detection of hyperglycemia affords substantial time to intervene and delay or prevent the onset of type 2 diabetes and/or its long-term complications. Indeed, once identified, several effective therapeutic approaches exist that can delay type 2 diabetes in those with prediabetes with an A1C 5.7–6.4% (39–47 mmol/mol), impaired glucose tolerance (IGT) on 75-g oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT), or impaired fasting glucose (IFG). The utility of screening with A1C for prediabetes and diabetes may be limited in the presence of certain hemoglobinopathies and conditions that affect red blood cell turnover (Table 2.3). See section 2, “Diagnosis and Classification of Diabetes,” and section 6, “Glycemic Goals, Hypoglycemia, and Hyperglycemic Crises,” for additional details on the appropriate use and limitations of A1C testing.

Three stages of type 1 diabetes have been defined, with symptomatic type 1 diabetes classified as stage 3 (Table 2.4). In individuals at risk for developing clinical type 1 diabetes, younger age of seroconversion (particularly under age 3 years), the total number of diabetes-related autoantibodies (1), and the development of autoantibodies against islet antigen 2 (IA-2) have all been associated with a more rapid progression to stage 3 type 1 diabetes. While continuous glucose monitoring can predict progression to stage 3 type 1 diabetes in children and adolescents with autoantibodies (2), OGTT-based metrics are more predictive of progression compared with continuous glucose monitoring (3). The decision to perform an OGTT may depend on such factors as eligibility and interest for stage-specific treatments, interest in participation in clinical research, OGTT availability, and the burden of testing. Consensus guidance provides expert recommendations on what should be monitored and how often in people with presymptomatic type 1 diabetes (4). Cost-effectiveness of population-based screening programs for type 1 diabetes has not been established (5,6), but such screening is being implemented outside the U.S. (7).

> **LIFESTYLE BEHAVIOR CHANGE FOR TYPE 2 DIABETES PREVENTION**  
> **Recommendations**  
> **3.3** Refer adults with overweight or obesity at high risk of type 2 diabetes to a diabetes prevention program to achieve and maintain a weight reduction of at least 5–7% of initial body weight through a healthy reduced-calorie eating pattern and ≥150 min/week of moderate-intensity physical activity.  
> **A**  
> **3.4** Prescribe an evidence-based eating pattern (e.g., Mediterranean, low carbohydrate) to individuals with prediabetes to prevent type 2 diabetes.  
> **B**  
> **3.5** Offer diabetes prevention programs to adults at high risk for type 2 diabetes.  
> **A** Diabetes prevention programs should be covered by third-party payors, and inconsistencies in access should be addressed.  
> **E**  
> **3.6** Based on individual preference, certified technology-assisted diabetes prevention programs through smartphones, web-based applications, and telehealth can be effective in preventing type 2 diabetes and should be considered.  
> **B**

### The Diabetes Prevention Program

Several major randomized controlled trials, including the Diabetes Prevention Program (DPP) (8), the Finnish Diabetes Prevention Study (DPS) (9), and the Da Qing Diabetes Prevention Study (Da Qing study) (10), demonstrated that lifestyle/behavioral intervention with an individualized reduced-calorie meal plan is highly effective in preventing or delaying type 2 diabetes and improving other cardiometabolic risk factors such as blood pressure, lipids, and markers of inflammation (11). The strongest evidence for diabetes prevention in the U.S. comes from the DPP trial (8). The DPP demonstrated that intensive lifestyle intervention could reduce the risk of incident type 2 diabetes by 58% over 3 years. Follow-up of three large trials of lifestyle intervention for diabetes prevention showed sustained reduction in the risk of progression to type 2 diabetes: 39% reduction at 30 years in the Da Qing study (12), 43% reduction at 7 years in the Finnish DPS (9), and 34% reduction at 10 years (13), 27% reduction at 15 years (14), and 24% reduction at 21 years in the U.S. Diabetes Prevention Program Outcomes Study (DPPOS) (15,16).

The DPP lifestyle intervention was a goal-based intervention. A complete description of the DPP and how to access it is available online at coveragetoolkit.org/about-national-dpp/ndpp-overview/. Briefly, the DPP administered a 16-session structured core curriculum, completed within the first 6 months of the program, followed by an additional 6 months of a flexible maintenance program. The core curriculum included sessions on reducing calories, increasing physical activity, self-monitoring, maintaining healthy lifestyle behaviors (such as how to make healthy choices when eating out), and guidance on managing psychological, social, and motivational challenges (17).

Two major goals of the DPP were to achieve and maintain at least 7% weight loss and to obtain 150 min of moderate-intensity physical activity per week, such as brisk walking. Weight loss was the most important factor in reducing incident diabetes. Obtaining at least 150 min of physical activity per week, even without achieving the weight loss goal, reduced incidence of type 2 diabetes by 44% (18). Participants were encouraged to distribute physical activity throughout the week with a minimum frequency of three times per week and at least 10 min per session. A maximum of 75 min of strength training could be applied toward the total 150 min/week physical activity goal. The initial focus of the nutrition intervention was on reducing total fat intake rather than caloric restriction. However, the concepts of calorie balance and the need to restrict total calories and fat were also introduced. Overall, the DPP’s lifestyle intervention was designed to produce a 700 kcal/week energy deficit (17).

The 7% weight loss goal was selected because it was feasible to achieve and maintain, hypothesized to reduce incident diabetes risk, and improved other cardiometabolic risk factors. Further analysis suggested greater benefit for diabetes prevention with at least 7–10% weight loss with lifestyle interventions (18). The recommended pace of weight loss was 1–2 lb/week.

While the DPP interventions were successful in preventing or delaying the onset of type 2 diabetes, major cardiovascular events were not significantly different 21 years after the DPP concluded, which may be due to the widespread use of statin, antihypertensive, and metformin therapy among all participants well after the conclusion of the study (19). However, the incidence of diabetes continued to be significantly

2025 December 10 on guest by http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S50/848822/dc26s003.pdf Downloaded from


---



Prevention or Delay of Diabetes Diabetes Care Volume 49, Supplement 1, January 2026

lower at 21 years of follow-up in both intensive lifestyle therapy and metformin groups, when compared with placebo, corresponding to increases in median diabetes-free survival of 3.5 years and 2.5 years, respectively (15). Importantly, the overall treatment effect was driven almost entirely by benefit seen during the initial DPP phase (15), underscoring the importance of early intervention and continued implementation of diabetes prevention efforts. Still, individuals can derive benefit from lifestyle interventions to prevent progression of prediabetes to diabetes irrespective of the duration of prediabetes prior to initiation of lifestyle intervention (20). Thus, there is clear potential benefit in diabetes prevention and minimal to no risk of harm with these interventions.

## Nutrition
Nutrition counseling for weight loss in the DPP lifestyle intervention arm focused on reduction of total fat and calories (8,17,18). However, current evidence suggests there is no ideal percentage of calories from carbohydrate, protein, and fat to prevent diabetes; therefore, macronutrient distribution should be based on an individualized assessment of current eating patterns, preferences, and metabolic goals. A variety of eating patterns (21) can be appropriate for individuals with prediabetes or diabetes, including Mediterranean-style, plant-based (which may or may not be omnivorous), Dietary Approaches to Stop Hypertension (DASH), and low-carbohydrate (22–25). The overall quality of food consumed (as measured by the Healthy Eating Index, Alternative Healthy Eating Index, and DASH score), with an emphasis on whole grains, legumes, nuts, fruits, and vegetables and minimal refined and processed foods, is also associated with a lower risk of type 2 diabetes (26–28). For people at risk for or living with diabetes, individualized medical nutrition therapy (see section 5, “Facilitating Positive Health Behaviors and Well-being to Improve Health Outcomes,” for more detailed information) is effective in lowering A1C (29,30).

## Physical Activity
Moderate-intensity physical activity, such as brisk walking for 150 min/week, has shown beneficial effects in those with prediabetes (8). Similarly, moderate-intensity physical activity has been shown to improve insulin sensitivity and reduce abdominal fat in children, adolescents, and young adults (31,32). Health care professionals are encouraged to promote a DPP-style program to all individuals who have been identified to be at an increased risk of type 2 diabetes. In addition to aerobic activity, a physical activity plan designed to prevent diabetes can include resistance training (17,33). Breaking up prolonged sedentary time may also be encouraged, as it lowers postprandial glucose levels (34). The effects of regular physical activity participation appear to extend to the prevention of gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM) as well (35,36).

## Delivery and Dissemination of Lifestyle Behavior Change for Diabetes Prevention
Because the intensive lifestyle intervention in the DPP was effective in preventing type 2 diabetes among those at high risk, and both DPP and adapted lifestyle behavior change programs for diabetes prevention were shown to be cost-effective across multiple applications, broader efforts to disseminate scalable DPP-like lifestyle behavior change programs for diabetes prevention with coverage by third-party payors ensued (37–42). Group delivery of DPP content in community or primary care settings has demonstrated the potential to reduce overall program costs while still producing weight loss and diabetes risk reduction (43,44). Interventions to prevent type 2 diabetes can also be delivered through workplace programming, with interventions that most closely adhere to DPP content shown to be most effective (45).

The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) developed the National Diabetes Prevention Program (National DPP), a resource designed to bring such evidence-based lifestyle change programs for preventing type 2 diabetes to communities (cdc.gov/diabetes-prevention). To be eligible for this program, individuals must have a BMI in the overweight range and be at risk for diabetes based on laboratory testing, a previous diagnosis of GDM, or a positive risk test (cdc.gov/prediabetes/risktest/). The CDC has also developed the Diabetes Prevention Impact Tool Kit (nccd.cdc.gov/toolkit/diabetesimpact) to help organizations assess the economics of providing or covering the National DPP (46). To expand preventive services using a cost-effective model, the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services expanded Medicare reimbursement coverage for the National DPP to organizations recognized by the CDC that become Medicare suppliers for this service (innovation.cms.gov/innovation-models/medicare-diabetes-prevention-program). The locations of Medicare DPPs are available online at innovation.cms.gov/innovation-models/medicare-diabetes-prevention-program/mdpp-map. To qualify for Medicare coverage, individuals must have BMI > 25 kg/m² (or BMI > 23 kg/m² if self-identified as Asian) and glycemic testing consistent with prediabetes in the last year. Medicaid DPP coverage is also expanding on a state-by-state basis.

While CDC-recognized behavioral counseling programs, including Medicare DPP services, have met minimum quality standards and are reimbursed by many payors, lower retention rates have been reported for younger adults and racial and ethnic minoritized populations (47). Therefore, other programs and modalities of behavioral counseling for diabetes prevention may also be appropriate and efficacious based on individual preferences and availability. Use of community health workers to support DPP-like interventions can be appropriate and cost-effective (48,49) (see section 1, “Improving Care and Promoting Health in Populations,” for more information). The use of community health workers may facilitate the adoption of behavior changes for diabetes prevention while bridging barriers related to social determinants of health. However, coverage by third-party payors remains limited. Counseling by a registered dietitian nutritionist has been shown to help individuals with prediabetes improve eating habits, increase physical activity, and achieve 7–10% weight loss (50–53). Individualized medical nutrition therapy (see section 5, “Facilitating Positive Health Behaviors and Well-being to Improve Health Outcomes,” for more detailed information) is also effective in improving glycemia in individuals diagnosed with prediabetes (51,54). Furthermore, trials involving medical nutrition therapy for adults with prediabetes found significant reductions in weight, waist circumference, and glycemia (54,55). Individuals with prediabetes can benefit



---


diabetesjournals.org/care     Prevention or Delay of Diabetes  S53

from referral to a registered dietitian nutritionist for individualized medical nutrition therapy upon diagnosis and at regular intervals throughout their treatment plan (52,56). Other health care professionals, such as pharmacists and diabetes care and education specialists, can also be considered for diabetes prevention efforts (56,57).

Technology-assisted programs may effectively deliver a DPP-like intervention (58–61). Such technology-assisted programs may deliver content through smartphones, web-based applications, and telehealth and may be an acceptable and efficacious option to bridge barriers, particularly for individuals with low income and/or in rural locations; however, not all technology-assisted programs are effective (58,62–64). The CDC Diabetes Prevention Recognition Program (DPRP) (https://www.cdc.gov/diabetes-prevention/php/program-provider/program-requirements.html) certifies technology-assisted modalities as effective vehicles for DPP-based interventions; such programs must use an approved curriculum, include interaction with a coach, and attain the DPP outcomes of participation, physical activity reporting, and weight loss. Health care professionals should consider referring adults with prediabetes to certified technology-assisted programs.

The CDC’s Division of Diabetes Translation National DPP toolkit (coveragetoolkit.org/recruitment-referral-for-the-national-dpp-lifestyle-change-program) provides diabetes care team members resources for how to increase referral and uptake of the DPP. Some ways to increase DPP utilization include direct mailings, phone scripts, and text-based outreach. Using multiple methods of outreach to increase awareness among those at risk, and among health care professionals, in addition offering the DPP virtually can improve participation and uptake (65,66). However, more work is needed to improve uptake among high-risk populations (67,68).

## Sleep Characteristics Associated With Increased Risk of Type 2 Diabetes

Sleep occupies approximately one-third of the day for most people and modulates important metabolic, endocrine, and cardiovascular processes (69). Sleep can be characterized using three key constructs: quantity, quality, and timing (i.e., chronotype). There is now established evidence for a U-shaped association between sleep duration and type 2 diabetes incidence, with the nadir typically occurring at 7 h per day, with short (typically defined as <6 h) and long (typically defined as >9 h) sleep duration having up to a 50% increase in the risk of type 2 diabetes, including progression from prediabetes (70). Sleep quality is defined as “an individual’s self-satisfaction with all aspects of the sleep experience” (71,72). A meta-analysis reported that poor overall sleep quality was associated with a 40% increased risk of developing type 2 diabetes (73). Chronotype preference has been linked with many chronic diseases, including type 2 diabetes. For example, for those with a preference for evenings (i.e., going to bed late and getting up late), there was a 2.5-fold higher odds ratio for type 2 diabetes than for those with a preference for mornings (i.e., going to bed early and getting up early), independent of sleep duration and sleep sufficiency (74). More detailed information concerning sleep and the impact of sleep on prediabetes and diabetes risk and management can be found in section 5, “Facilitating Positive Health Behaviors and Well-being to Improve Health Outcomes.”

## PHARMACOLOGIC INTERVENTIONS TO DELAY TYPE 2 DIABETES

> **Recommendations**  
> **3.7** Metformin for the prevention of type 2 diabetes should be considered in adults at high risk of type 2 diabetes, as typified by the Diabetes Prevention Program, especially those aged 25–59 years with BMI ≥35 kg/m², higher fasting plasma glucose (e.g., ≥110 mg/dL [≥6 mmol/L]), and higher A1C (e.g., ≥6.0% [≥42 mmol/mol]), and in individuals with prior gestational diabetes mellitus. **A**  
> **3.8** Consider using metformin to prevent hyperglycemia in high-risk individuals treated with a phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase α (PI3Kα) inhibitor (e.g., alpelisib and inavolisib). **B**  
> **3.9** Consider using metformin to prevent hyperglycemia in high-risk individuals treated with high-dose glucocorticoids. **B**  
> **3.10** Consider periodic assessment of vitamin B12 levels in individuals receiving long-term metformin therapy, especially in those with anemia or peripheral neuropathy. **B**

Because weight loss and maintenance through lifestyle (e.g., nutrition and physical activity) behavior changes might not be sufficient on their own (13), some people at high risk for type 2 diabetes may benefit from additional pharmacotherapy support. Various pharmacologic agents used to treat diabetes have also been evaluated for diabetes prevention. Metformin, α-glucosidase inhibitors, incretin receptor agonists (e.g., liraglutide, semaglutide, and tirzepatide), thiazolidinediones, and insulin have all been shown to lower the incidence of diabetes in specific populations (75–83). However, whether initiating glucose-lowering treatment early—before hyperglycemia reaches the diagnostic threshold of diabetes—improves long-term health outcomes is unknown. Indeed, the benefits of glucose lowering to the normoglycemic range need to be balanced against the potential adverse effects of these therapies and the burden and cost of treatment. There are currently no long-term data to support the use of pharmacologic treatments other than metformin for the sole purpose of preventing type 2 diabetes. However, use of glucagon-like peptide 1–based therapies for weight management in individuals with overweight or obesity—an essential component of type 2 diabetes prevention—is highly beneficial and should be considered, as discussed in detail in section 8, “Obesity and Weight Management for the Prevention and Treatment of Diabetes.” Importantly, in the DPP, weight loss was key to reducing the risk of progression to diabetes, with every kilogram of weight loss conferring a 16% reduction in risk of progression over 3.2 years (18). In individuals with previous history of GDM, the risk of type 2 diabetes increased by 18% for every 1-unit increase in BMI above the preconception baseline (84). Several medications evaluated for obesity treatment (e.g., orlistat, phentermine and topiramate, liraglutide, semaglutide, and tirzepatide) have been shown to decrease the incidence of type 2 diabetes in those with prediabetes (80,85–87).

2025 December 10 on guest by http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S50/848822/dc26s003.pdf Downloaded from


---



Prevention or Delay of Diabetes  
Diabetes Care Volume 49, Supplement 1, January 2026

Other medications have also been assessed for their efficacy in preventing type 2 diabetes. The antihypertensive valsartan was found to modestly reduce the incidence of diabetes among individuals with prediabetes and cardiovascular disease or risk factors, but with no difference in cardiovascular outcomes (88). Thus, we do not recommend using valsartan for the prevention of diabetes. Testosterone therapy also reduced the risk of incident type 2 diabetes by 41% in men aged 50–74 years with central obesity and prediabetes (89). However, the benefit of testosterone was observed only when added to a structured lifestyle program. Indeed, the TRAVERSE Diabetes Study (a prespecified efficacy trial nested within the large multicenter TRAVERSE trial whose primary objective was to assess the cardiovascular outcomes of testosterone therapy in men aged 45–80 years with hypogonadism) found no benefit of testosterone as compared with placebo with respect to progression from prediabetes to diabetes or remission of diabetes among those who had prediabetes or diabetes at baseline, respectively (90). Testosterone therapy also did not alter glucose or A1C levels among participants with prediabetes or diabetes, nor were there any differences in outcomes by baseline testosterone level, preexisting cardiovascular disease, age, or race. Thus, we do not recommend testosterone therapy for the prevention of type 2 diabetes in men with hypogonadism; the decision to initiate testosterone replacement needs to be informed by individualized treatment considerations that weigh the expected benefits and harms of treatment.

There has been significant interest in understanding the potential of vitamin D therapy to prevent progression of high-risk prediabetes to type 2 diabetes in adults (91). Three randomized controlled trials tested whether vitamin D therapy in combination with lifestyle modification reduces the risk of developing diabetes in adults with high-risk prediabetes (i.e., IGT or meeting two or three criteria for the diagnosis of prediabetes [fasting glucose, A1C, 2-h glucose after a 75-g OGTT]): the Tromsø study in Norway, with 511 participants; the Vitamin D and Type 2 Diabetes (D2d) study in the U.S., with 2,423 participants; and the Diabetes Prevention with Active Vitamin D (DPVD) study in Japan, with 1,256 participants (92–94). Although vitamin D therapy consistently appeared to modestly reduce the risk of developing diabetes in all three trials, none of the results were statistically significant, which was attributed to insufficient statistical power. Subsequently, several meta-analyses pooling the three randomized clinical trials along with other smaller studies suggested a modest (i.e., 10–15% risk reduction) potential benefit in specific populations, such as older adults, individuals with lower baseline vitamin D levels, and individuals without obesity (95,96). However, there are several concerns and uncertainties regarding recommending widespread vitamin D therapy for adults with high-risk prediabetes. First, these trials used varying dosages of vitamin D that were higher than the recommended daily allowance (i.e., 600 IU/day for those aged 18–70 years and 800 IU/day for those older than 70 years). Second, the benefit-to-risk ratio of vitamin D therapy for people with high-risk prediabetes remains uncertain. Although there were no safety concerns identified in these trials, the anticipated treatment of many millions of adults with prediabetes in the U.S. and globally could increase the risk of adverse events (such as hypercalcemia, hypercalciuria, nephrolithiasis, and kidney failure), especially treatment with unspecified doses of vitamin D without monitoring blood 25-hydroxy vitamin D levels.

Thus, the expected benefit, harm, treatment burden, and cost of using any medication to prevent type 2 diabetes must be considered for each individual as part of informed shared decision-making. This is particularly important because any pharmacologic intervention is likely to be needed to be used long-term because of waning effects after stopping the medication. At the present time, there are no pharmacologic agents approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration specifically for the prevention of type 2 diabetes.

## Metformin

Metformin has the most robust efficacy and safety data as a pharmacologic therapy for diabetes prevention among people with prediabetes (82). Importantly, metformin was overall less effective than lifestyle modification in the DPP, although group differences attenuated over time in the DPPOS (14) and metformin was as effective as lifestyle modification in participants with BMI ≥35 kg/m² and in younger participants aged 25–44 years (8). In individuals with a history of GDM, metformin and intensive lifestyle modification led to an equivalent 50% reduction in diabetes risk (97). Both interventions remained effective during a 10-year follow-up period (98), with lifestyle therapy being highly cost-effective ($12,878 per quality-adjusted life-year [QALY]) and metformin marginally cost-saving compared with placebo (37). By the time of the 15-year follow-up (DPPOS), exploratory analyses demonstrated that participants with a higher baseline fasting glucose (≥110 mg/dL [≥6 mmol/L] vs. 95–109 mg/dL [5.3–5.9 mmol/L]), those with a higher A1C (6.0–6.4% [42–46 mmol/mol] vs. <6.0% [<42 mmol/mol]), and individuals with a history of GDM (vs. individuals without a history of GDM) experienced higher risk reductions with metformin, identifying subgroups of participants that may benefit the most from metformin (83). In the Indian Diabetes Prevention Program (IDPP-1), metformin and lifestyle intervention reduced diabetes risk similarly at 30 months; however, the lifestyle intervention in IDPP-1 was less intensive than that in the DPP (99). Based on findings from the DPP, metformin should be recommended as an option for high-risk individuals (e.g., younger individuals, those with history of GDM, or those with BMI ≥35 kg/m²).

Individuals receiving high-dose and/or long-duration glucocorticoid therapy are at risk for developing glucocorticoid-induced diabetes (see section 2, “Diagnosis and Classification of Diabetes”). Metformin can be considered to prevent the development of glucocorticoid-induced hyperglycemia in high-risk individuals, notably those receiving higher doses of glucocorticoids, with longer treatment duration, and in the presence of other risk factors for diabetes. The efficacy of metformin to prevent hyperglycemia—particularly insulin resistance and postprandial hyperglycemia—has been demonstrated in small randomized clinical trials both in healthy individuals (100) and in individuals receiving high-dose glucocorticoids for the treatment of cancer (101) and rheumatologic/autoimmune disorders (102,103). In one trial with 40 participants receiving high-



---


diabetesjournals.org/care     Prevention or Delay of Diabetes  S55

dose prednisolone for the treatment of inflammatory conditions, metformin also reduced rates of infection and all-cause hospital readmissions (103).

Proactive use of metformin may also be beneficial in preventing hyperglycemia in individuals receiving phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase α (PI3Kα) inhibitors (e.g., alpelisib and inavolisib) for the treatment of cancer (see section 2, “Diagnosis and Classification of Diabetes,” for additional details on diabetes induced by systemic anticancer therapy). This is particularly important because hyperglycemia is the most frequent adverse event of PI3Kα inhibitor therapy that leads to treatment discontinuation (104). In a phase 2 trial of metformin to prevent hyperglycemia in individuals receiving alpelisib for advanced breast cancer (metformin was started 1 week prior to starting alpelisib and continued for the duration of treatment), metformin prevented the development of grade 3–4 hyperglycemia in all but four participants, and none had to discontinue alpelisib therapy (105). Similar benefits were seen with implementation of a metformin hyperglycemia-prevention protocol in routine practice (106). Individuals at highest risk for developing hyperglycemia with PI3Kα inhibitor therapy include those who are older (≥70 years old), with obesity (BMI ≥30 kg/m²), concurrently treated with glucocorticoids, and with hyperglycemia at baseline (e.g., A1C ≥5.7% [39 mmol/mol] or fasting plasma glucose ≥100 mg/dL [5.6 mmol/L]) (107,108). However, it is important to weigh the benefits of preventing hyperglycemia with the potential adverse effects of metformin therapy, particularly diarrhea, which is also a frequent adverse effect of PI3Kα therapy (though there is no evidence that concurrent use of these two medications further exacerbates diarrhea risk) (108).

Decreased vitamin B12 levels are a known consequence of long-term treatment with metformin (109). Periodic assessment of vitamin B12 level in those taking metformin chronically should be considered to check for possible deficiency, especially in those receiving a higher dose (e.g., ≥1,500 mg/day) (110), with longer treatment duration (4–5 years) (111), with other risk factors for vitamin B12 deficiency, and if a deficiency is suspected, such as in people with anemia, peripheral neuropathy, or chronic kidney disease (109,112,113) (see section 9, “Pharmacologic Approaches to Glycemic Treatment,” for more details). A person who has been taking metformin for more than 4 years or is at risk for vitamin B12 deficiency for other reasons (e.g., vegan dietary pattern, previous gastric/small bowel surgery) should be monitored for vitamin B12 deficiency annually (114,115).

## PREVENTION OF VASCULAR DISEASE AND MORTALITY

> **Recommendations**  
> **3.11** Prediabetes is associated with heightened cardiovascular risk; therefore, screening for and treatment of modifiable risk factors for cardiovascular disease are suggested. **B**  
> **3.12** Statin therapy may increase the risk of type 2 diabetes in people at high risk of developing type 2 diabetes. In such individuals, glucose status should be monitored regularly and diabetes prevention approaches reinforced. It is not recommended that statins be avoided or discontinued for this adverse effect. **B**  
> **3.13** In people with a history of stroke and evidence of insulin resistance and prediabetes, pioglitazone may be considered to lower the risk of stroke or myocardial infarction. However, this benefit needs to be balanced with the increased risk of weight gain, edema, and fractures. **A** Lower doses may mitigate the risk of adverse effects but may be less effective. **C**

People with prediabetes often have other cardiovascular risk factors, including hypertension and dyslipidemia (116), and are at increased risk for cardiovascular disease (117,118). Evaluation for tobacco use and referral for tobacco cessation should be part of routine care for those at risk for diabetes. Of note, the years immediately following smoking cessation may represent a time of increased risk for diabetes (119,120), and individuals should be monitored for diabetes development and receive evidence-based lifestyle behavior change for diabetes prevention as described in this section. See section 5, “Facilitating Positive Health Behaviors and Well-being to Improve Health Outcomes,” for more detailed information. The lifestyle interventions for weight loss in study populations at risk for type 2 diabetes have shown a reduction in cardiovascular risk factors and the need for medications used to treat these cardiovascular risk factors (121,122). The lifestyle intervention in the Da Qing study was associated with lowering cardiovascular disease and mortality at 23 and 30 years of observational follow-up (10,12). Treatment goals and therapies for hypertension and dyslipidemia in the primary and secondary prevention of cardiovascular disease for people with prediabetes should be based on their level of cardiovascular risk. Increased vigilance is warranted to identify and treat these and other cardiovascular disease risk factors (123).

Statin use increases risk of diabetes (124,125). In the DPP, statin use was associated with greater diabetes risk irrespective of the treatment group (pooled hazard ratio [HR] [95% CI] for incident diabetes 1.36 [1.17–1.58]) (124). In trials of primary and secondary prevention of cardiovascular disease, cardiovascular and mortality benefits of statin therapy exceed the risk of diabetes (126,127), suggesting a highly favorable benefit-to-harm balance with statin therapy. Hence, discontinuation of statins due to concerns of diabetes risk is not recommended in this population.

Results of cardiovascular outcome trials in people without diabetes also provide important evidence for cardiovascular risk reduction in people with increased cardiometabolic risk, though not specifically prediabetes (see section 10, “Cardiovascular Disease and Risk Management,” for more details). The IRIS (Insulin Resistance Intervention after Stroke) trial of people with a recent (<6 months) stroke or transient ischemic attack, without diabetes but with insulin resistance (as defined by a HOMA of insulin resistance index of ≥3.0), evaluated pioglitazone (goal dose of 45 mg daily) compared with placebo. At 4.8 years, the risk of stroke or myocardial infarction, as well as the risk of diabetes, was lower in the pioglitazone group than in the placebo group; weight gain, edema, and fractures were higher in the pioglitazone treatment group (128–130). Lower doses may mitigate the adverse effects but may also be less effective (131).

## PERSON-CENTERED CARE GOALS

> **Recommendations**  
> **3.14** In adults with overweight or obesity at high risk of type 2 diabetes, care goals should include weight

2025 December 10 on guest by http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S50/848822/dc26s003.pdf from Downloaded


---



Prevention or Delay of Diabetes     Diabetes Care Volume 49, Supplement 1, January 2026

> loss and maintenance, minimizing the progression of hyperglycemia, and attention to cardiovascular risk. **B**  
> **3.15 Pharmacotherapy** (e.g., for weight management, minimizing the progression of hyperglycemia, and cardiovascular risk reduction) should be considered to support person-centered care goals. **A**  
> **3.16 More intensive preventive approaches** should be considered in individuals who are at particularly high risk of progression to diabetes, including individuals with BMI ≥35 kg/m², those with higher glucose levels (e.g., fasting plasma glucose 110–125 mg/dL [6.1–6.9 mmol/L], 2-h postchallenge glucose 173–199 mg/dL [9.6–11.0 mmol/L], and A1C ≥6.0% [≥42 mmol/mol]), and individuals with a history of gestational diabetes mellitus. **A**

Individualized risk-to-benefit ratio should be considered in screening, intervention, and monitoring to lower the risk of type 2 diabetes and associated comorbidities. Multiple factors, including age, BMI, and other comorbidities, may influence the risk of progression to diabetes and lifetime risk of complications (132,133). Prediabetes is associated with increased cardiovascular disease and mortality (118), which emphasizes the importance of attending to cardiovascular risk in this population. However, the new diagnosis of prediabetes in older adults (aged >70 years) is less relevant for progression to diabetes; indeed, regression to normoglycemia or death was more frequent than progression to diabetes in the Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities (ARIC) study (132). Moreover, diabetes-related morbidity and mortality is lower and the benefits of treatment are not established in those who develop type 2 diabetes after age 70 years (134).

In the DPP, which enrolled high-risk individuals with IGT, elevated fasting glucose, and elevated BMI, the crude incidence of diabetes within the placebo group was 11 cases per 100 person-years, with a cumulative 3-year incidence of diabetes of 29% (8). Characteristics of individuals in the DPP and DPPOS who were at particularly high risk of progression to diabetes (crude incidence of diabetes 14–22 cases per 100 person-years) included BMI ≥35 kg/m², higher glucose levels (e.g., fasting plasma glucose 110–125 mg/dL [6.0–6.9 mmol/L], 2-h postchallenge glucose 173–199 mg/dL [9.6–11.0 mmol/L], A1C ≥6.0% [≥42 mmol/mol]), or a history of GDM (8,97,98). In contrast, in the community-based ARIC study, observational follow-up of adults with mean age 75 years with laboratory evidence of prediabetes (based on A1C 5.7–6.4% [39–47 mmol/mol] and/or fasting glucose 100–125 mg/dL [5.6–6.9 mmol/L]), but not meeting specific BMI criteria, found lower progression to diabetes over 6 years: 9% of those with A1C-defined prediabetes and 8% of those with IFG (133).

Thus, it is important to individualize the risk-to-benefit ratio of intervention and consider person-centered goals. Risk models have generally found a higher benefit of the intervention in those at highest risk (18). Diabetes prevention trials and observational studies highlight key principles that may guide person-centered goals. In the DPP, which enrolled a high-risk population meeting criteria for overweight or obesity, weight loss was an important mediator of diabetes prevention or delay, with greater metabolic benefit seen with greater weight loss (18,135). In the DPP and DPPOS, progression to diabetes, duration of diabetes, and mean level of glycemia were important determinants of the development of microvascular complications (14). Achieving normal glucose regulation, even once, during the DPP was associated with a lower risk of diabetes and lower risk of microvascular complications irrespective of the treatment arm (136). Observational follow-up of the Da Qing study also showed that regression from IGT to normal glucose tolerance or remaining with IGT rather than progressing to type 2 diabetes at the end of the 6-year intervention trial resulted in significantly lower risk of cardiovascular disease and microvascular disease over 30 years (137).

Pharmacotherapy for weight management and cardiovascular risk reduction (see section 8, “Obesity and Weight Management for the Prevention and Treatment of Diabetes,” and section 10, “Cardiovascular Disease and Risk Management,” for more details) can be considered to support individualized person-centered goals, with more intensive preventive approaches considered in individuals at high risk of progression.

## PREVENTION OR DELAY OF SYMPTOMATIC TYPE 1 DIABETES

### Lifestyle and Type 1 Diabetes Progression

Observational studies have identified several factors that increase β-cell demand and risk of progression to clinical type 1 diabetes among individuals with islet autoantibodies, including lower levels of physical activity (138), higher glycemic index eating patterns (139), and total sugar intake (140). Similar associations have not been observed for the development of autoantibodies.

In The Environmental Determinants of Diabetes in the Young (TEDDY) longitudinal study, daily minutes spent in moderate to vigorous physical activity were associated with a reduced risk of progression to type 1 diabetes in children 5–15 years of age with multiple islet autoantibodies (HR 0.92 [95% CI 0.86–0.99] per 10-min increase; *P* = 0.02) (138). In the Diabetes Autoimmunity Study in the Young (DAISY), also in children with islet autoantibodies, consumption of higher glycemic index foods (HR 2.20 [95% CI 1.17–4.15]) and total sugar intake (HR 1.75 [95% CI 1.07–2.85]) (139,140) were both associated with progression to type 1 diabetes. In nonobese diabetic mice, an animal model for the development of type 1 diabetes, sustained high-glucose drinking significantly aggravated islet inflammation and accelerated the onset of type 1 diabetes (141). However, efficacy of lifestyle interventions that modify these factors in individuals with stage 1 or stage 2 type 1 diabetes has not yet been reported.

### Pharmacologic Interventions to Delay Symptomatic Type 1 Diabetes

> **Recommendation**  
> **3.17** Teplizumab-mzwv infusion to delay the onset of symptomatic type 1 diabetes (stage 3) should be discussed with selected individuals aged ≥8 years with stage 2 type 1 diabetes. Treatment should be in a setting with appropriately trained personnel. **B**

Teplizumab, a CD3-directed humanized monoclonal antibody engineered to have decreased Fc receptor binding, has been

2025 December 10 on guest by http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S50/848822/dc26s003.pdf Downloaded from



---

diabetesjournals.org/care     Prevention or  Delay  of Diabetes  S57

approved  to  delay  the  onset  of  stage  3                     outcomes  of  Type1Screen.  Diabetes  Care  2025;                  Advisory  Committee: Advisory  Report  to  the
type  1  diabetes  in  people  8  years  and                      48:556–563                                                         Secretary  of  Health  and  Human  Services  and
older with stage 2 type 1 diabetes based                          8.             Knowler WC, Barrett-Connor E, Fowler SE, et         Secretary  of  Agriculture. U.S.  Department  of
in  part  on  the  results  of  a  single  trial  in              al. Reduction in the incidence of type 2 diabetes                  Health and Human Services, 2024
                                                                  with lifestyle intervention or metformin. N Engl J                 22. Jannasch  F,  Kroger  J,  Schulze  MB.  Dietary
relatives  of  people  with  type  1  diabetes                    Med 2002;346:393–403                                               patterns  and  type  2  diabetes:  a  systematic
(142).  In  this  study,  44  individuals  were                   9.         Lindstrom  J, Ilanne-Parikka P,  Peltonen M, et         literature review and meta-analysis of prospective
randomized  to  a  14-day  course  of  tepli-                     al.;  Finnish  Diabetes  Prevention  Study  Group.                 studies. J Nutr 2017;147:1174–1182
zumab  and  32  to  placebo.  The  median                         Sustained  reduction  in  the  incidence  of  type  2              23. Salmela J, Konttinen H, Lappalainen R, et al.
time to stage 3 type 1 diabetes diagnosis                         diabetes  by  lifestyle  intervention:  follow-up  of              Eating  behavior  dimensions  and  9-year  weight
                                                                  the  Finnish  Diabetes  Prevention  Study.  Lancet                 loss  maintenance:  a  sub-study  of  the  Finnish
was 48.4 months in the teplizumab group                           2006;368:1673–1679                                                 Diabetes  Prevention  Study.  Int  J  Obes  (Lond)
and  24.4  months  in  the  placebo  group.                       10.        Li  G,  Zhang  P, Wang  J,  et  al.  Cardiovascular     2023;47:564–573
Type 1 diabetes was diagnosed in 19 (43%)                         mortality, all-cause mortality, and diabetes incidence             24.         Guest NS, Raj S, Landry MJ, et al. Vegetarian
participants who received teplizumab and                          after lifestyle intervention for people with impaired              and vegan dietary patterns to treat adult type 2
                                                                  glucose  tolerance  in  the  Da  Qing  Diabetes                    diabetes: a systematic review and  meta-analysis
23 (72%) participants who received pla-                           Prevention  Study:  a  23-year  follow-up  study.                  of randomized controlled trials. Adv Nutr 2024;15:
cebo  (HR  0.41  [95%  CI  0.22–0.78]).  In                       Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol 2014;2:474–480                          100294
prespecified  analyses,  the  presence  of                        11.        Nathan DM, Bennett PH, Crandall JP, et al.; DPP         25. Bensaaud A, Seery S, Gibson I, et al. Dietary
HLA-DR4,  absence  of  HLA-DR3,  and  ab-                         Research Group. Does diabetes prevention translate                 approaches to stop hypertension (DASH) for the
sence of antizinc transporter 8 antibody                          into  reduced  long-term  vascular  complications  of              primary and secondary prevention of cardiovascular
                                                                  diabetes? Diabetologia 2019;62:1319–1328                           diseases. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2025;5:
predicted  response  to  teplizumab  (HR                          12. Gong  Q,  Zhang  P,  Wang  J,  et  al.;  Da  Qing              CD013729
0.20  [95%  CI  09.0.45],  0.18  [0.07–0.45],                     Diabetes  Prevention  Study  Group.  Morbidity  and                26. Qian F, Liu G, Hu FB, Bhupathiraju SN, Sun Q.
and  0.07  [0.02–0.26],  respectively). The                       mortality after lifestyle intervention for people with             Association  between  plant-based  dietary  patterns
most  common  adverse  reactions  were                            impaired  glucose  tolerance:  30-year  results  of  the           and risk of type 2 diabetes: a systematic review and
                                                                  Da  Qing  Diabetes  Prevention  Outcome  Study.                    meta-analysis.  JAMA  Intern  Med  2019;179:1335–
transient lymphopenia (73%) followed by                           Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol 2019;7:452–461                          1344
rash (36%).                                                       13.              Knowler  WC, Fowler SE, Hamman RF, et al.         27. Yau  JW,  Thor  SM,  Ramadas  A.  Nutritional
                      Numerous  clinical  studies  are  being     10-year  follow-up  of  diabetes  incidence  and                   strategies  in  prediabetes:  a  scoping  review  of
conducted  to  test  methods  for  prevent-                       weight  loss  in  the  Diabetes  Prevention  Program               recent evidence. Nutrients 2020;12:2990
                                                                  Outcomes Study. Lancet 2009;374:1677–1686                          28. Ley SH, Hamdy O, Mohan V, Hu FB. Prevention
ing  or  delaying  the  onset  of  stage  3                       14. Diabetes Prevention ProgramResearch Group.                     and  management  of  type  2  diabetes:  dietary
type  1  diabetes  in  those  with  evidence                      Long-term  effects  of  lifestyle  intervention  or                components and nutritional strategies. Lancet
of  autoimmunity  without  symptoms  or                           metformin  on  diabetes  development  and  micro-                  2014;383:1999–2007
for  delaying  loss  of  insulin  secretory ca-                   vascular  complications  over  15-year  follow-up:  the            29. Dudzik  JM,  Senkus  KE,  Evert  AB,  et  al. The
pacity after onset of stage 3, some with                          Diabetes  Prevention  Program  Outcomes  Study.                    effectiveness of medical nutrition therapy provided
                                                                  Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol 2015;3:866–875                          by  a  dietitian  in  adults  with  prediabetes:  a
promising  results  (see ClinicalTrials.gov                       15.           Knowler WC, Doherty L, Edelstein SL, et al.;         systematic review and meta-analysis. Am J Clin
and TrialNet.org).                                                DPP/DPPOS  Research  Group.  Long-term  effects                    Nutr 2023;118:892–910
                                                                  and effect heterogeneity of lifestyle and metformin                30. Razaz JM, Rahmani J, Varkaneh HK, Thompson
References                                                        interventions  on  type  2  diabetes  incidence                    J,  Clark  C,  Abdulazeem  HM. The  health  effects  of
1.              Ziegler  AG,  Rewers  M,  Simell  O,  et  al.     over  21  years  in  the  US  Diabetes  Prevention                 medical  nutrition  therapy  by  dietitians  in  patients
Seroconversion  to  multiple  islet  autoantibodies               Program randomised clinical trial. Lancet Diabetes                 with  diabetes:  a  systematic  review  and  meta-
and  risk  of  progression  to  diabetes  in  children.           Endocrinol 2025;13:469–481                                         analysis: nutrition therapy and diabetes. Prim Care
JAMA 2013;309:2473–2479                                           16.     Crandall  JP,  Dabelea  D,  Knowler  WC,  et  al.;         Diabetes 2019;13:399–408
2. Steck  AK,  Dong  F,  Taki  I,  et  al.  Continuous            DPP  Research  Group.  The  Diabetes  Prevention                   31.    García-Hermoso  A,  López-Gil  JF,  Izquierdo
glucose  monitoring  predicts  progression  to                    Program  and  its  Outcomes  Study:  NIDDK’s                       M,  Ramírez-Vélez  R,  Ezzatvar  Y.  Exercise  and
diabetes  in  autoantibody  positive  children.  J                journey into the prevention of type 2 diabetes                     insulin resistance markers in children and adolescents
Clin Endocrinol Metab 2019;104:3337–3344                          and  its  public  health  impact.  Diabetes  Care                  with  excess  weight:  a  systematic  review  and
3.            Ylescupidez A, Speake C, Pietropaolo SL, et al.     2025;48:1101–1111                                                  network  meta-analysis.  JAMA  Pediatr  2023;177:
OGTT metrics surpass continuous glucose monitoring                17.                 Diabetes Prevention Program (DPP) Research     1276–1284
data  for  T1D  prediction  in  multiple-autoantibody-            Group.  The  Diabetes  Prevention  Program  (DPP):                 32. Davis CL, Pollock NK, Waller JL, et al. Exercise
positive  individuals.  J  Clin  Endocrinol  Metab  2023;         description of lifestyle intervention. Diabetes Care               dose  and diabetes risk in  overweight and obese
109:57–67                                                         2002;25:2165–2171                                                  children:  a  randomized  controlled  trial.  JAMA
4.            Phillip  M,  Achenbach  P,  Addala  A,  et  al.     18. Hamman  RF,  Wing  RR,  Edelstein  SL,  et  al.                2012;308:1103–1112
                                                                  Effect of weight loss with lifestyle intervention on               33. Dai  X,  Zhai  L,  Chen  Q,  et  al.  Two-year-
Consensus  guidance  for  monitoring  individuals                 risk of diabetes. Diabetes Care 2006;29:2102–2107                  supervised  resistance  training  prevented  diabetes
with  islet  autoantibody–positive  pre-stage 3  type  1          19.      Goldberg RB, Orchard  TJ,  Crandall  JP,  et al.;         incidence in people with prediabetes: a randomised
diabetes. Diabetes Care 2024;47:1276–1298                         Diabetes  Prevention  Program  Research  Group.                    control trial. Diabetes Metab Res Rev 2019;35:e3143
5.        Sims  EK,  Besser  REJ,  Dayan  C,  et  al.;  NIDDK     Effects  of  long-term  metformin  and  lifestyle                  34.       Thorp AA, Kingwell BA, Sethi P, Hammond L,
Type 1 Diabetes TrialNet Study Group. Screening                   interventions  on  cardiovascular  events  in  the                 Owen  N,  Dunstan  DW.  Alternating  bouts  of  sitting
for  type  1  diabetes in  the  general  population:  a           Diabetes  Prevention  Program  and  its  Outcome                   and  standing  attenuate  postprandial  glucose
status report and perspective. Diabetes 2022;71:                  Study. Circulation 2022;145:1632–1641                              responses. Med Sci Sports Exerc 2014;46:2053–2061
610–623                                                           20.             Dagogo-Jack S, Umekwe N, Brewer AA, et al.         35.         Rute-Larrieta  C,  Mota-Cátedra  G,  Carmona-
6.         Beran  D,  Bandini  A,  Bosi  E,  et  al.  Type  1     Outcome  of  lifestyle  intervention  in  relation  to             Torres JM, et al. Physical activity during pregnancy
diabetes screening: need for ethical, equity, and                 duration  of  pre-diabetes:  the  Pathobiology  and                and risk of gestational diabetes mellitus: a meta-
health  systems  perspective.  Lancet  Diabetes                   Reversibility  of  Prediabetes  in  a  Biracial  Cohort            review. Life (Basel) 2024;14:755
Endocrinol 2025;13:175–176                                        (PROP-ABC)  study.  BMJ  Open  Diabetes Res  Care                  36. Santa  Cruz  TE,  Sarasqueta  C,  Muruzábal  JC,
7.            Wentworth JM, Sing ABE, Naselli G, et al. Islet     2022;10:e002748                                                    Ansuategui  E,  Sanz  O.  A  systematic  review  and
autoantibody  screening  throughout  Australia                    21.                  Dietary  Guidelines  Advisory  Committee.     meta-analysis  of  exercise-based  intervention  to
using  in-home  blood  spot  sampling:  2-year                    Scientific Report of the 2025 Dietary Guidelines                   prevent  gestational  diabetes  in  women  with

2025  December
      10 on  guest
                by     http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S50/848822/dc26s003.pdf
                       from   Downloaded

---



Prevention or Delay of Diabetes     Diabetes Care Volume 49, Supplement 1, January 2026

overweight or obesity. BMC Pregnancy Childbirth 2025;25:5  
37. Herman WH, Hoerger TJ, Brandle M, et al.; Diabetes Prevention Program Research Group. The cost-effectiveness of lifestyle modification or metformin in preventing type 2 diabetes in adults with impaired glucose tolerance. Ann Intern Med 2005;142:323–332  
38. Chen F, Su W, Becker SH, et al. Clinical and economic impact of a digital, remotely-delivered intensive behavioral counseling program on medicare beneficiaries at risk for diabetes and cardiovascular disease. PLoS One 2016;11: e0163627  
39. Diabetes Prevention Program Research Group. The 10-year cost-effectiveness of lifestyle intervention or metformin for diabetes prevention: an intent-to-treat analysis of the DPP/DPPOS. Diabetes Care 2012;35:723–730  
40. Alva ML, Hoerger TJ, Jeyaraman R, Amico P, Rojas-Smith L. Impact of the YMCA of the USA diabetes prevention program on Medicare spending and utilization. Health Aff (Millwood) 2017;36:417–424  
41. Zhou X, Siegel KR, Ng BP, et al. Cost-effectiveness of diabetes prevention interventions targeting high-risk individuals and whole populations: a systematic review. Diabetes Care 2020;43:1593–1616  
42. Ackermann RT, O’Brien MJ. Evidence and challenges for translation and population impact of the Diabetes Prevention Program. Curr Diab Rep 2020;20:9  
43. Balk EM, Earley A, Raman G, Avendano EA, Pittas AG, Remington PL. Combined diet and physical activity promotion programs to prevent type 2 diabetes among persons at increased risk: a systematic review for the Community Preventive Services Task Force. Ann Intern Med 2015;163:437–451  
44. Ackermann RT, Kang R, Cooper AJ, et al. Effect on health care expenditures during nationwide implementation of the Diabetes Prevention Program as a health insurance benefit. Diabetes Care 2019;42:1776–1783  
45. Fitzpatrick-Lewis D, Ali MU, Horvath S, Nagpal S, Ghanem S, Sherifali D. Effectiveness of workplace interventions to reduce the risk for type 2 diabetes: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Can J Diabetes 2022;46:84–98  
46. Lanza A, Soler R, Smith B, Hoerger T, Neuwahl S, Zhang P. The Diabetes Prevention Impact Tool Kit: an online tool kit to assess the cost-effectiveness of preventing type 2 diabetes. J Public Health Manag Pract 2019;25:E1–E5  
47. Cannon MJ, Masalovich S, Ng BP, et al. Retention among participants in the National Diabetes Prevention Program lifestyle change program, 2012-2017. Diabetes Care 2020;43:2042–2049  
48. The Community Guide. Diabetes Prevention: interventions Engaging Community Health Workers, 2016. Accessed 19 August 2025. Available from https://www.thecommunityguide.org/findings/diabetes-prevention-interventions-engaging-community-health-workers  
49. Zare H, Delgado P, Spencer M, et al. Using community health workers to address barriers to participation and retention in diabetes prevention program: a concept paper. J Prim Care Community Health 2022;13:21501319221134563  

50. Evert AB, Dennison M, Gardner CD, et al. Nutrition therapy for adults with diabetes or prediabetes: a consensus report. Diabetes Care 2019;42:731–754  
51. Raynor HA, Davidson PG, Burns H, et al. Medical nutrition therapy and weight loss questions for the evidence analysis library prevention of type 2 diabetes project: systematic reviews. J Acad Nutr Diet 2017;117:1578–1611  
52. Khk L. Nutrition therapy for adults with diabetes or prediabetes. ADCES Pract 2022;10:34–38  
53. Briggs Early K, Stanley K. Position of the Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics: the role of medical nutrition therapy and registered dietitian nutritionists in the prevention and treatment of prediabetes and type 2 diabetes. J Acad Nutr Diet 2018;118:343–353  
54. Parker AR, Byham-Gray L, Denmark R, Winkle PJ. The effect of medical nutrition therapy by a registered dietitian nutritionist in patients with prediabetes participating in a randomized controlled clinical research trial. J Acad Nutr Diet 2014;114:1739–1748  
55. Esposito K, Chiodini P, Maiorino MI, Bellastella G, Panagiotakos D, Giugliano D. Which diet for prevention of type 2 diabetes? A meta-analysis of prospective studies. Endocrine 2014;47:107–116  
56. Powers MA, Bardsley JK, Cypress M, et al. Diabetes self-management education and support in adults with type 2 diabetes: a consensus report of the American Diabetes Association, the Association of Diabetes Care & Education Specialists, the Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics, the American Academy of Family Physicians, the American Academy of PAs, the American Association of Nurse Practitioners, and the American Pharmacists Association. Diabetes Care 2020;43:1636–1649  
57. Hudspeth BD. Power of prevention: the pharmacist’s role in prediabetes management. Diabetes Spectr 2018;31:320–323  
58. Grock S, Ku J-h, Kim J, Moin T. A review of technology-assisted interventions for diabetes prevention. Curr Diab Rep 2017;17:107  
59. Bian RR, Piatt GA, Sen A, et al. The effect of technology-mediated diabetes prevention interventions on weight: a meta-analysis. J Med Internet Res 2017;19:e76  
60. Moin T, Damschroder LJ, AuYoung M, et al. Results from a trial of an online diabetes prevention program intervention. Am J Prev Med 2018;55:583–591  
61. Michaelides A, Major J, Pienkosz E, Wood M, Kim Y, Toro-Ramos T. Usefulness of a novel mobile diabetes prevention program delivery platform with human coaching: 65-week observational follow-up. JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2018;6:e93  
62. Kim SE, Castro Sweet CM, Cho E, Tsai J, Cousineau MR. Evaluation of a digital diabetes prevention program adapted for low-income patients, 2016-2018. Prev Chronic Dis 2019;16: E155  
63. Vadheim LM, Patch K, Brokaw SM, et al. Telehealth delivery of the diabetes prevention program to rural communities. Transl Behav Med 2017;7:286–291  
64. Fischer HH, Durfee MJ, Raghunath SG, Ritchie ND. Short message service text message support for weight loss in patients with prediabetes: pragmatic trial. JMIR Diabetes 2019;4:e12985  

65. Formagini T, Teruel Camargo J, Perales-Puchalt J, Drees BM, Fracachan Cabrera M, Ramírez M. A culturally and linguistically adapted text-message diabetes prevention program for Latinos: feasibility, acceptability, and preliminary effectiveness. Transl Behav Med 2024;14:138–147  
66. Auster-Gussman LA, Lockwood KG, Graham SA, Stein N, Branch OH. Reach of a fully digital diabetes prevention program in health professional shortage areas. Popul Health Manag 2022;25:441–448  
67. Malone A, Clair K, Chanfreau C, et al. Predictors of enrollment in a virtual diabetes prevention program among women veterans: a retrospective analysis. BMC Womens Health 2024;24:465  
68. Wilson KE, Michaud TL, Almeida FA, et al. Using a population health management approach to enroll participants in a diabetes prevention trial: reach outcomes from the PREDICTS randomized clinical trial. Transl Behav Med 2021;11:1066–1077  
69. Henson J, Covenant A, Hall AP, et al. waking up to the importance of sleep in type 2 diabetes management: a narrative review. Diabetes Care 2024;47:331–343  
70. Davies MJ, Aroda VR, Collins BS, et al. Management of hyperglycemia in type 2 diabetes, 2022. A consensus report by the American Diabetes Association (ADA) and the European Association for the Study of Diabetes (EASD). Diabetes Care 2022;45:2753–2786  
71. Mostafa SA, Mena SC, Antza C, Balanos G, Nirantharakumar K, Tahrani AA. Sleep behaviours and associated habits and the progression of prediabetes to type 2 diabetes mellitus in adults: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Diab Vasc Dis Res 2022;19:14791641221088824  
72. Nelson KL, Davis JE, Corbett CF. Sleep quality: an evolutionary concept analysis. Nurs Forum 2022;57:144–151  
73. Anothaisintawee T, Reutrakul S, Van Cauter E, Thakkinstian A. Sleep disturbances compared to traditional risk factors for diabetes development: systematic review and meta-analysis. Sleep Med Rev 2016;30:11–24  
74. Merikanto I, Lahti T, Puolijoki H, et al. Associations of chronotype and sleep with cardiovascular diseases and type 2 diabetes. Chronobiol Int 2013;30:470–477  
75. Gerstein HC, Bosch J, Dagenais GR, et al.; ORIGIN Trial Investigators. Basal insulin and cardiovascular and other outcomes in dysglycemia. N Engl J Med 2012;367:319–328  
76. DeFronzo RA, Tripathy D, Schwenke DC, et al.; ACT NOW Study. Pioglitazone for diabetes prevention in impaired glucose tolerance. N Engl J Med 2011;364:1104–1115  
77. Gerstein HC, Yusuf S, Bosch J, et al.; DREAM (Diabetes REduction Assessment with ramipril and rosiglitazone Medication) Trial Investigators. Effect of rosiglitazone on the frequency of diabetes in patients with impaired glucose tolerance or impaired fasting glucose: a randomised controlled trial. Lancet 2006;368:1096–1105  
78. Le Roux CW, Astrup A, Fujioka K, et al.; SCALE Obesity Prediabetes NN8022-1839 Study Group. 3 years of liraglutide versus placebo for type 2 diabetes risk reduction and weight management in individuals with prediabetes: a randomised, double-blind trial. Lancet 2017;389:1399–1409  



---


diabetesjournals.org/care     Prevention or Delay of Diabetes

79. Chiasson J-L, Josse RG, Gomis R, Hanefeld M, Karasik A, Laakso M, STOP-NIDDM Trail Research Group. Acarbose for prevention of type 2 diabetes mellitus: the STOP-NIDDM randomised trial. Lancet 2002;359:2072–2077  
80. Wilding JPH, Batterham RL, Calanna S, et al.; STEP 1 Study Group. Once-weekly semaglutide in adults with overweight or obesity. N Engl J Med 2021;384:989–1002  
81. Jastreboff AM, Aronne LJ, Ahmad NN, et al.; SURMOUNT-1 Investigators. Tirzepatide once weekly for the treatment of obesity. N Engl J Med 2022;387:205–216  
82. Diabetes Prevention ProgramResearch Group. Long-term safety, tolerability, and weight loss associated with metformin in the Diabetes Prevention Program Outcomes Study. Diabetes Care 2012;35:731–737  
83. Diabetes Prevention ProgramResearch Group. Long-term effects of metformin on diabetes prevention: identification of subgroups that benefited most in the Diabetes Prevention Program and Diabetes Prevention Program Outcomes Study. Diabetes Care 2019;42:601–608  
84. Dennison RA, Chen ES, Green ME, et al. The absolute and relative risk of type 2 diabetes after gestational diabetes: a systematic review and meta-analysis of 129 studies. Diabetes Res Clin Pract 2021;171:108625  
85. Torgerson JS, Hauptman J, Boldrin MN, Sjostrom L. XENical in the prevention of diabetes in obese subjects (XENDOS) study: a randomized study of orlistat as an adjunct to lifestyle changes for the prevention of type 2 diabetes in obese patients. Diabetes Care 2004;27:155–161  
86. Garvey WT, Ryan DH, Henry R, et al. Prevention of type 2 diabetes in subjects with prediabetes and metabolic syndrome treated with phentermine and topiramate extended release. Diabetes Care 2014;37:912–921  
87. Jastreboff AM, Le Roux CW, Stefanski A, et al.; SURMOUNT-1 Investigators. Tirzepatide for obesity treatment and diabetes prevention. N Engl J Med 2025;392:958–971  
88. McMurray JJ, Holman RR, Haffner SM, et al.; NAVIGATOR Study Group. Effect of valsartan on the incidence of diabetes and cardiovascular events. N Engl J Med 2010;362:1477–1490  
89. Wittert G, Bracken K, Robledo KP, et al. Testosterone treatment to prevent or revert type 2 diabetes in men enrolled in a lifestyle programme (T4DM): a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, 2-year, phase 3b trial. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol 2021;9:32–45  
90. Bhasin S, Lincoff AM, Nissen SE, et al. Effect of testosterone on progression from prediabetes to diabetes in men with hypogonadism: a substudy of the TRAVERSE randomized clinical trial. JAMA Intern Med 2024;184:353–362  
91. Demay MB, Pittas AG, Bikle DD, et al. Vitamin D for the prevention of disease: an Endocrine Society clinical practice guideline. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2024;109:1907–1947  
92. Jorde R, Sollid ST, Svartberg J, et al. Vitamin D 20,000 IU per week for five years does not prevent progression from prediabetes to diabetes. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2016;101:1647–1655  
93. Pittas AG, Dawson-Hughes B, Sheehan P, et al.; D2d Research Group. Vitamin D supplementation and prevention of type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med 2019;381:520–530  
94. Kawahara T, Suzuki G, Mizuno S, et al. Effect of active vitamin D treatment on development of type 2 diabetes: DPVD randomised controlled trial in Japanese population. BMJ 2022;377:e066222  
95. Pittas AG, Kawahara T, Jorde R, et al. Vitamin D and risk for type 2 diabetes in people with prediabetes: a systematic review and meta-analysis of individual participant data from 3 randomized clinical trials. Ann Intern Med 2023;176:355–363  
96. Shah VP, Nayfeh T, Alsawaf Y, et al. A systematic review supporting the Endocrine Society clinical practice guidelines on vitamin D. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2024;109:1961–1974  
97. Ratner RE, Christophi CA, Metzger BE, et al.; Diabetes Prevention Program Research Group. Prevention of diabetes in women with a history of gestational diabetes: effects of metformin and lifestyle interventions. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2008;93:4774–4779  
98. Aroda VR, Christophi CA, Edelstein SL, et al.; Diabetes Prevention Program Research Group. The effect of lifestyle intervention and metformin on preventing or delaying diabetes among women with and without gestational diabetes: the Diabetes Prevention Program Outcomes Study 10-year follow-up. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2015;100:1646–1653  
99. Ramachandran A, Snehalatha C, Mary S, Mukesh B, Bhaskar AD, Vijay V, Indian Diabetes Prevention Programme (IDPP). The Indian Diabetes Prevention Programme shows that lifestyle modification and metformin prevent type 2 diabetes in Asian Indian subjects with impaired glucose tolerance (IDPP-1). Diabetologia 2006;49:289–297  
100. Thierry S, Peterson CJ, Pfammatter S, et al. Short-term metformin protects against glucocorticoid-induced toxicity in healthy individuals: a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Diabetes Care 2025;48:719–727  
101. Ochola LA, Nyamu DG, Guantai EM, Weru IW. Metformin’s effectiveness in preventing prednisone-induced hyperglycemia in hematological cancers. J Oncol Pharm Pract 2020;26:823–834  
102. Seelig E, Meyer S, Timper K, et al. Metformin prevents metabolic side effects during systemic glucocorticoid treatment. Eur J Endocrinol 2017;176:349–358  
103. Pernicova I, Kelly S, Ajodha S, et al. Metformin to reduce metabolic complications and inflammation in patients on systemic glucocorticoid therapy: a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, proof-of-concept, phase 2 trial. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol 2020;8:278–291  
104. Cheung Y-MM, Cromwell GE, Tolaney SM, Min L, McDonnell ME. Factors leading to alpelisib discontinuation in patients with hormone receptor positive, human epidermal growth factor receptor-2 negative breast cancer. Breast Cancer Res Treat 2022;192:303–311  
105. Llombart-Cussac A, Pérez-Garcia JM, Ruiz Borrego M, et al. Preventing alpelisib-related hyperglycaemia in HR+/HER2-/PIK3CA-mutated advanced breast cancer using metformin (METALLICA): a multicentre, open-label, single-arm, phase 2 trial. EClinicalMedicine 2024;71:102520  
106. Burnette SE, Poehlein E, Lee H-J, Force J, Westbrook K, Moore HN. Evaluation of alpelisib-induced hyperglycemia prophylaxis and associated risk factors in PIK3CA-mutated hormone-receptor positive, human epidermal growth factor-2 negative advanced breast cancer. Breast Cancer Res Treat 2023;197:369–376  
107. Moore HN, Goncalves MD, Johnston AM, et al. Effective strategies for the prevention and mitigation of phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase inhibitor-associated hyperglycemia: optimizing patient care. Clin Breast Cancer 2025;25:1–11  
108. Rugo HS, André F, Yamashita T, et al. Time course and management of key adverse events during the randomized phase III SOLAR-1 study of PI3K inhibitor alpelisib plus fulvestrant in patients with HR-positive advanced breast cancer. Ann Oncol 2020;31:1001–1010  
109. Aroda VR, Edelstein SL, Goldberg RB, et al.; Diabetes Prevention Program Research Group. Long-term metformin use and vitamin B12 deficiency in the Diabetes Prevention Program Outcomes Study. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2016;101:1754–1761  
110. Kim J, Ahn CW, Fang S, Lee HS, Park JS. Association between metformin dose and vitamin B12 deficiency in patients with type 2 diabetes. Medicine (Baltimore) 2019;98:e17918  
111. de Jager J, Kooy A, Lehert P, et al. Long term treatment with metformin in patients with type 2 diabetes and risk of vitamin B-12 deficiency: randomised placebo controlled trial. BMJ 2010;340:c2181  
112. Griffin SJ, Bethel MA, Holman RR, et al. Metformin in non-diabetic hyperglycaemia: the GLINT feasibility RCT. Health Technol Assess 2018;22:1–64  
113. Kidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes (KDIGO) CKD Work Group. KDIGO 2024 clinical practice guideline for the evaluation and management of chronic kidney disease. Kidney Int 2024;105:S117–S314  
114. Jung C, Park S, Kim H. Concomitant use of metformin and proton pump inhibitors increases vitamin B12 deficiency risk in type 2 diabetes. J Diabetes Investig 2025;16:1020–1027  
115. Chapman LE, Darling AL, Brown JE. Association between metformin and vitamin B12 deficiency in patients with type 2 diabetes: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Diabetes Metab 2016;42:316–327  
116. Ali MK, Bullard KM, Saydah S, Imperatore G, Gregg EW. Cardiovascular and renal burdens of prediabetes in the USA: analysis of data from serial cross-sectional surveys, 1988-2014. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol 2018;6:392–403  
117. Pan Y, Chen W, Wang Y. Prediabetes and outcome of ischemic stroke or transient ischemic attack: a systematic review and meta-analysis. J Stroke Cerebrovasc Dis 2019;28:683–692  
118. Huang Y, Cai X, Mai W, Li M, Hu Y. Association between prediabetes and risk of cardiovascular disease and all cause mortality: systematic review and meta-analysis. BMJ 2016;355:i5953  
119. Yeh H-C, Duncan BB, Schmidt MI, Wang N-Y, Brancati FL. Smoking, smoking cessation, and risk for type 2 diabetes mellitus: a cohort study. Ann Intern Med 2010;152:10–17  
120. Hu Y, Zong G, Liu G, et al. Smoking cessation, weight change, type 2 diabetes, and mortality. N Engl J Med 2018;379:623–632  
121. Orchard TJ, Temprosa M, Barrett-Connor E, et al. Long-term effects of the Diabetes Prevention Program interventions on cardiovascular risk factors:



---

S60   Prevention or  Delay of  Diabetes     Diabetes Care Volume  49,  Supplement  1,  January  2026

a report from the DPP Outcomes Study. Diabet Med             stroke or transient ischemic attack. N Engl J Med             disease  in  the  Diabetes  Prevention  Program
2013;30:46–55                                                2016;374:1321–1331                                            Outcomes Study (DPPOS). Diabetes Care 2019;
122.      Salas-Salvadó  J,  Díaz-López  A,  Ruiz-Canela     129. Inzucchi SE, Viscoli CM, Young LH, et al.; IRIS          42:1809–1815
M, et al.; PREDIMED-Plus investigators. Effect of            Trial Investigators. Pioglitazone prevents diabetes in        137.     Chen Y, Zhang P, Wang J, et al. Associations
a  lifestyle  intervention  program  with  energy-           patients with insulin resistance and cerebrovascular          of  progression  to  diabetes  and  regression  to
restricted  Mediterranean  diet  and  exercise  on           disease. Diabetes Care 2016;39:1684–1692                      normal  glucose  tolerance  with  development  of
weight  loss and  cardiovascular  risk factors: one-         130.  Spence  JD,  Viscoli  CM,  Inzucchi  SE,  et  al.;      cardiovascular and microvascular disease among
year results of the PREDIMED-Plus trial. Diabetes            IRIS  Investigators.  Pioglitazone  therapy  in  patients     people  with  impaired  glucose  tolerance:  a
Care 2019;42:777–788                                         with stroke and prediabetes: a post hoc analysis of           secondary  analysis  of  the  30  year  Da  Qing
123. Arnett DK, Blumenthal RS, Albert MA, et al.             the  IRIS  randomized  clinical  trial.  JAMA  Neurol         Diabetes Prevention Outcome Study. Diabetologia
2019  ACC/AHA  Guideline  on  the  primary                   2019;76:526–535                                               2021;64:1279–1287
prevention of cardiovascular disease: a report               131.  Spence  JD,  Viscoli  C,  Kernan  WN,  et  al.          138. Liu  X,  Johnson  SB,  Lynch  KF,  et al.;  TEDDY
of the American College of Cardiology/American               Efficacy  of  lower  doses  of  pioglitazone  after           Study Group. Physical activity and the development
Heart Association Task Force on Clinical Practice            stroke  or  transient  ischaemic  attack  in  patients        of islet autoimmunity and type 1 diabetes in  5- to
Guidelines. Circulation 2019;140:e596–e646                   with  insulin  resistance.  Diabetes  Obes  Metab
124. Crandall JP, Mather K, Rajpathak SN, et al.             2022;24:1150–1158                                             15-year-old  children  followed  in  the  TEDDY  study.
Statin use and risk of developing diabetes: results          132.  Nadeau  KJ,  Anderson  BJ,  Berg  EG,  et  al.          Diabetes Care 2023;46:1409–1416
from  the  Diabetes  Prevention  Program.  BMJ               Youth-onset  type  2  diabetes  consensus  report:            139. Lamb  MM, Yin  X,  Barriga  K,  et  al.  Dietary
Open Diabetes Res Care 2017;5:e000438                        current  status,  challenges,  and  priorities.  Diabetes     glycemic index, development of islet autoimmunity,
125.           Cholesterol  Treatment  Trialists’  (CTT)     Care 2016;39:1635–1642                                        and  subsequent  progression  to  type  1  diabetes  in
Collaboration.  Effects  of  statin  therapy  on             133.  Rooney MR, Rawlings AM, Pankow JS, et al.               young children. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2008;
diagnoses of new-onset diabetes and worsening                Risk  of  progression  to  diabetes  among  older             93:3936–3942
glycaemia  in  large-scale  randomised  blinded              adults with prediabetes. JAMA Intern Med 2021;                140. Lamb  MM,  Frederiksen  B,  Seifert  JA,
statin trials: an individual participant data meta-          181:511–519                                                   Kroehl M, Rewers M, Norris JM. Sugar intake
analysis.  Lancet  Diabetes  Endocrinol  2024;12:            134.    Cigolle CT, Blaum CS, Lyu C, Ha J, Kabeto M,          is  associated  with  progression  from  islet
306–319                                                      Zhong  J.  Associations  of  age  at  diagnosis  and          autoimmunity  to  type  1  diabetes:  the  Diabetes
126.    Ridker  PM,  Pradhan  A,  MacFadyen  JG,             duration of diabetes with morbidity and mortality             Autoimmunity  Study  in  the  Young.  Diabetologia
Libby  P,  Glynn  RJ.  Cardiovascular  benefits  and         among  older  adults.  JAMA  Netw  Open  2022;5:              2015;58:2027–2034
diabetes  risks  of  statin  therapy  in  primary            e2232766                                                      141. Li X, Wang L, Meng G, et al. Sustained high
prevention: an analysis from the JUPITER trial.              135.  Lachin  JM,  Christophi  CA,  Edelstein  SL,  et        glucose  intake  accelerates  type  1  diabetes  in
Lancet 2012;380:565–571                                      al.; DDK Research Group. Factors associated with              NOD mice. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne) 2022;13:
127.      Cai T, Abel L, Langford O, et al. Associations     diabetes onset during metformin versus placebo
between  statins  and  adverse  events  in  primary          therapy  in  the  diabetes  prevention  program.              1037822
prevention  of cardiovascular  disease:  systematic          Diabetes 2007;56:1153–1159                                    142. Herold  KC,  Bundy  BN,  Long  SA,  et  al.;
review  with  pairwise,  network,  and  dose-                136.  Perreault  L,  Pan  Q,  Schroeder  EB,  et  al.;        Type 1 Diabetes TrialNet Study Group. An anti-
response meta-analyses. BMJ 2021;374:n1537                   Diabetes  Prevention  Program  Research  Group.               CD3  antibody, teplizumab,  in  relatives  at  risk
128.       Kernan WN, Viscoli CM, Furie KL, et al.; IRIS     Regression  from  prediabetes  to  normal  glucose            for  type  1  diabetes.  N  Engl  J  Med  2019;381:
Trial  Investigators.  Pioglitazone  after  ischemic         regulation  and  prevalence  of  microvascular                603–613

2025  December
      10 on  guest
                by     http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S50/848822/dc26s003.pdf
                       from   Downloaded