

Diabetes Care  Volume 49, Supplement 1, January 2026

# 4. Comprehensive Medical Evaluation and Assessment of Comorbidities: Standards of Care in Diabetes—2026  
*Diabetes Care 2026;49(Suppl. 1):S61–S88 | https://doi.org/10.2337/dc26-S004*  

_American Diabetes Association_  
_Professional Practice Committee for Diabetes*_

The American Diabetes Association (ADA) “Standards of Care in Diabetes” includes the ADA’s current clinical practice recommendations and is intended to provide the components of diabetes care, general treatment goals and guidelines, and tools to evaluate quality of care. Members of the ADA Professional Practice Committee for Diabetes, an interprofessional expert committee, are responsible for updating the Standards of Care annually, or more frequently as warranted. For a detailed description of ADA standards, statements, and reports, as well as the evidence-grading system for ADA’s clinical practice recommendations and a full list of Professional Practice Committee members, please refer to Introduction and Methodology. Readers who wish to comment on the Standards of Care are invited to do so at professional.diabetes.org/SOC.

## PERSON-CENTERED COLLABORATIVE CARE

**Recommendations**  
**4.1** A communication style that uses person-centered, culturally sensitive, and strength-based language and active listening; elicits individual preferences and beliefs; and assesses literacy, numeracy, and potential barriers to care should be used to optimize health outcomes and health-related quality of life. **B**  
**4.2** People with diabetes can benefit from a coordinated interprofessional team that may include but is not limited to diabetes care and education specialists, primary care and subspecialty clinicians, nurses, registered dietitian nutritionists, exercise specialists, pharmacists, dentists, podiatrists, and behavioral health professionals. **C**

A successful medical evaluation and care plan depends on the beneficial interactions and care coordination between the person with diabetes and the care team. The Chronic Care Model (1) and other evidence-based care delivery models (see section 1, “Improving Care and Promoting Health in Populations”) can support a person-centered approach to care that requires a close working relationship between the person with diabetes, their clinicians, and the broader health care team involved in treatment planning and implementation. People with diabetes should receive health care from a coordinated interprofessional team that may include but is not limited to diabetes care and education specialists, primary care and subspecialty clinicians, nurses, registered dietitian nutritionists, exercise specialists, pharmacists, dentists, podiatrists, behavioral health professionals, and community

----

> *A complete list of members of the American Diabetes Association Professional Practice Committee for Diabetes can be found at https://doi.org/10.2337/dc26-SINT.*  
>  
> Duality of interest information for each contributor is available at https://doi.org/10.2337/dc26-SDIS.  
>  
> Suggested citation: American Diabetes Association Professional Practice Committee for Diabetes.  
> 4. Comprehensive medical evaluation and assessment of comorbidities: Standards of Care in Diabetes—2026. *Diabetes Care* 2026;49(Suppl. 1): S61–S88  
>  
> The **BONE HEALTH** subsection has received endorsement from the American Society for Bone and Mineral Research.  
>  
> © 2025 by the American Diabetes Association. Readers may use this work for educational, noncommercial purposes if properly cited and unaltered. The version of record may be linked at https://diabetesjournals.org/care, but ADA permission is required to post this work on any third-party site or platform. This publication and its contents may not be reproduced, distributed, or used for text or data mining, machine learning, or similar technologies without prior written permission. Requests to reuse, adapt, or distribute this work may be sent to permissions@diabetes.org. More information is available at https://diabetesjournals.org/journals/pages/license.

2025 December 10 on guest by http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S61/848865/dc26s004.pdf Downloaded from



---

S62   Comprehensive Medical  Evaluation  and  Assessment  of  Comorbidities    Diabetes Care Volume  49,  Supplement  1,  January  2026

partners such as community health workers          preferences, values, and goals. This indi-           should  be  used  to  support  the  person’s
and  community  paramedics.  Individuals           vidualized management plan should take               self-management  efforts,  including  pro-
with  diabetes  and  their  care  partners  or     into  account  the  person’s  age,  cognitive        viding  education  on  problem-solving and
caregivers  must  assume  an  active  role  in     abilities, school/work schedule and condi-           coping  skills  for  all  aspects  of  diabetes
their  care.  Based  on  the  preferences  and     tions,  health  beliefs,  support  systems,          management.
values of the person with diabetes, elicited       eating  patterns,  physical  activity,  social       Communication  between  health  care
by the care team, the person with diabetes,        situation,  financial  concerns,  cultural  fac-     professionals  and  people  with  diabetes
their  family  or  support  group,  and  the       tors,  literacy  and  numeracy  (mathemati-          and  their  families  should  acknowledge
health  care  team  together  formulate  the       cal  literacy),  diabetes  history  (duration,       that  multiple  factors  impact  diabetes
management plan, which includes lifestyle          complications,  and  current  use  of  medi-         management  but  also  emphasize  that
management  (see  section  5,  “Facilitating       cations), comorbidities, disabilities, health        collaboratively  developed  treatment  plans
Positive Health Behaviors and Well-being           priorities,  other  medical  conditions,  pref-      and a healthy lifestyle can significantly im-
to  Improve  Health  Outcomes”)  and               erences  for  care,  access  to  health  care        prove  disease  outcomes  and  well-being
pharmacotherapy, as appropriate.                   services,  and  life  expectancy.  People  liv-      (2).  Thus,  the  goal  of  communication
The  goals  of  treatment  for  diabetes           ing  with  diabetes  should  be  engaged  in         between health care professionals and
are  to  prevent  or  delay  complications         conversation about these aspects of their            people  with  diabetes  is  to  establish  a
and  optimize  quality  of  life  (Fig.  4.1).     lives  and  diabetes  management,  with              collaborative  relationship  and  to  assess
Treatment  goals  and  plans  should  be           routine  reassessment  as  necessary  given          and  address  self-management  barriers
cocreated  by  the  care  team  and  people        their  changing  circumstances  across  the          without  blaming  people  with  diabetes
with  diabetes  based  on  their  individual       life span. Various strategies and techniques         for  “noncompliance”  or  “nonadherence”

                         Decision cycle for person-centered glycemic
                                    management in type 2 diabetes

REVIEW AND AGREE ON                                           ASSESS KEY PERSON CHARACTERISTICS
MANAGEMENT PLAN                                               • The individual’s preferences, values, and goals
• Review management plan                                      • Current lifestyle and health behaviors
• Mutually agree on changes                                   • Comorbidities (i.e., CVD, CKD, and HF)
• Ensure agreed modification of therapy is                    • Clinical characteristics (i.e., age, A1C, and weight)
  implemented in a timely fashion to avoid                    • Mental health, cognition and functional status
  therapeutic inertia                                         • Social determinants of health
• Undertake decision cycle regularly (at least
  once or twice a year)                                                CONSIDER SPECIFIC
• Operate in an integrated system of care                              FACTORS THAT IMPACT
                                                                       CHOICE OF TREATMENT
PROVIDE ONGOING SUPPORT                                fl%E–Yw         • Individualized glycemic and weight goals
AND MONITORING OF:                                     %jw3EXU         • Impact on weight, hypoglycemia,
• Emotional well-being                                                  cardiovascular and kidney protection,
• Lifestyle and health behaviors                                  s     and MASLD
• Tolerability of medications                                          • Underlying physiological factors
• Surrogate measures of treatment,                                     • Side effect profiles of medications
  including BGM and CGM, weight, step                                  • Complexity of treatment plan (i.e.,
  count, A1C, BP, and lipids                                            frequency and mode of administration)
                                                                       • Treatment choice to optimize
                                                                        medication use and reduce treatment
   IMPLEMENT                                                            discontinuation
   MANAGEMENT PLAN                                                     • Access, cost and availability of
   • Ensure there is regular review; more                               medication(s), and lifestyle choices
    frequent contact initially is often
    desirable for DSMES                                           USE SHARED DECISION!MAKING TO
                                                                  CO!CREATE A MANAGEMENT PLAN

                                    AGREE ON MANAGEMENT PLAN      • Ensure access to DSMES
                                                                  • Involve an educated and informed person (and
                                    • Specify SMART goals:             the individual’s family or caregiver)
                                     ‒ Specific                   • Explore personal preferences
                                     ‒ Measurable                 • Language matters (include person-first,
                                     ‒ Achievable                      strengths-based, empowering language)
                                     ‒ Realistic                  • Include motivational interviewing, goal setting,
                                     ‒ Time limited                    and shared decision-making

Figure  4.1—Decision  cycle  for  person-centered  glycemic  management  in  type  2  diabetes.  BGM,  blood  glucose  monitoring;  BP,  blood  pressure;
 CGM, continuous glucose monitoring; CKD, chronic kidney disease; CVD, cardiovascular disease; DSMES, diabetes self-management education and
 support; HF, heart failure. MASLD, metabolic dysfunction-associated steatotic liver disease. Adapted from Davies et al. (307).

2025  December
      10 on  guest
                by     http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S61/848865/dc26s004.pdf
                       from   Downloaded

---


diabetesjournals.org/care     Comprehensive Medical  Evaluation  and  Assessment  of  Comorbidities  S63

when the outcomes of self-management are not optimal (3). The familiar terms noncompliance and nonadherence denote a passive, obedient role for a person with diabetes in “following doctor’s orders,” which is at odds with the active role people with diabetes take in the day-to-day decision-making, planning, monitoring, evaluation, and problem-solving involved in diabetes self-management. Using a nonjudgmental approach that normalizes periodic lapses in management may help minimize the person’s resistance to reporting problems with self-management. Empathizing and using active listening techniques, such as open-ended questions, reflective statements, and summarizing what the person said, can help facilitate communication. Perceptions of people with diabetes about their own ability, or self-efficacy, to self-manage diabetes constitute one important psychosocial factor related to improved diabetes self-management and treatment outcomes in diabetes (4) and should be a goal of ongoing assessment, education, and treatment planning.

Language has a strong impact on perceptions and behavior. Empowering language can help to inform and motivate, while shame and judgement can be discouraging. The American Diabetes Association (ADA) and the Association of Diabetes Care & Education Specialists (ADCES) (formerly called the American Association of Diabetes Educators) joint consensus report, “The Use of Language in Diabetes Care and Education,” provides the authors’ expert opinion regarding the use of language by health care professionals when speaking or writing about diabetes for people with diabetes or for professional audiences (3,5). Although further research is needed to address the impact of language on diabetes outcomes, the report includes five key consensus recommendations for language use:

* Use language that is neutral, nonjudgmental, and based on facts, actions, physiology, or biology.
* Use language free from stigma.
* Use language that is strength based, respectful, and inclusive and that imparts hope.
* Use language that fosters collaboration between people with diabetes and health care professionals.
* Use language that is person centered (e.g., “person with diabetes” is preferred over “diabetic”).

## COMPREHENSIVE MEDICAL EVALUATION

> **Recommendations**  
> **4.3** A complete medical evaluation should be performed at the initial visit and follow-up, as appropriate, to:  
> * Confirm the diagnosis and classify diabetes. **A**  
> * Assess glycemic status and previous and current treatment. **A**  
> * Evaluate for diabetes complications, potential comorbid conditions, and overall health status. **A**  
> * Identify care partners, support systems, and available resources. **E**  
> * Assess social determinants of health and structural barriers to optimal health and health care. **A**  
> * Review risk factor management in the person with diabetes. **A**  
> * Begin engagement with the person with diabetes in the formulation of a care management plan including goals of care. **A**  
> * Develop a plan for continuing care. **A**  
> **4.4** Ongoing management should be guided by the assessment of overall health and functional status, diabetes complications, cardiovascular risk, hypoglycemia risk, and shared decision making to set therapeutic goals. **B**

The comprehensive medical evaluation includes the initial and follow-up evaluations, which comprise assessment of complications, psychosocial assessment, management of comorbid conditions, overall health, functional and cognitive status, and engagement of the person with diabetes throughout the process. While a comprehensive list is provided in Table 4.1, in clinical practice the health care professional may need to prioritize select components of the medical evaluation given the available resources and time. Engaging other members of the health care team can also support comprehensive diabetes care. The goal of these recommendations is to provide the health care team with guidance and information so it can optimally support people with diabetes and their care partners. In addition to the medical history, physical examination, and laboratory tests, health care professionals should assess diabetes self-management behaviors, nutrition, social determinants of health, and psychosocial health (see section 5, “Facilitating Positive Health Behaviors and Well-being to Improve Health Outcomes”) and give guidance on routine immunizations. The assessment of sleep pattern and duration, bone health, and sexual health should also be considered as an important part of the comprehensive evaluation of a person with diabetes. Follow-up visits should occur at least every 3–6 months individualized to the person and then at least annually.

Lifestyle management and behavioral health care are cornerstones of diabetes management. People with diabetes should be referred for diabetes self-management education and support, medical nutrition therapy, and assessment of behavioral health concerns as appropriate. People with diabetes should receive recommended preventive care services (e.g., immunizations and age- and sex-appropriate cancer screening); tobacco use cessation counseling; and ophthalmological, dental, podiatric, and other referrals, as needed.

The assessment of risk of acute and chronic diabetes complications and treatment planning are key components of initial and follow-up visits (**Table 4.2**). The risk of atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease (CVD) and heart failure (see section 10, “Cardiovascular Disease and Risk Management”), chronic kidney disease (CKD) staging (see section 11, “Chronic Kidney Disease and Risk Management”), presence of retinopathy and neuropathy (see section 12, “Retinopathy, Neuropathy, and Foot Care”), and risk of treatment-associated hypoglycemia should be used to individualize goals for glycemia (see section 6, “Glycemic Goals, Hypoglycemia, and Hyperglycemic Crises”), blood pressure, and lipids and to select specific glucose-lowering medication(s) (see section 9, “Pharmacologic Approaches to Glycemic Treatment”), antihypertension medications, and lipid lowering treatment intensity.

Additional referrals should be arranged as necessary (**Table 4.2**). Clinicians should ensure that people with diabetes are appropriately screened for complications, comorbidities, and treatment burden. Glycemic management is a part, not the sole goal, of the clinical encounter.

2025  December 10 on guest by http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S61/848865/dc26s004.pdf from Downloaded


---



Comprehensive Medical Evaluation and Assessment of Comorbidities     Diabetes Care Volume 49, Supplement 1, January 2026

<table>
    <thead>
    <tr>
        <th colspan="5">Table 4.1—Components of the comprehensive diabetes medical evaluation at</th>
    </tr>
    </thead>
    <tr>
        <td colspan="5">initial, follow-up, and annual visits</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td></td>
        <td colspan="4">Visit</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td></td>
<td>Initial</td>
<td>Every  follow-up</td>
        <td colspan="2">Annual</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>Past  medical  and  family  history</td>
<td>-</td>
        <td colspan="3">- -</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>Diabetes history</td>
<td>-</td>
        <td colspan="2">-</td>
<td>-</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>• Characteristics  at  onset (e.g.,  age  and  symptoms 
<br/>
and/or signs)</td>
<td>✓</td>
<td>-</td>
        <td colspan="2"></td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>• Review  of  previous treatment plans  and  response</td>
<td>✓</td>
<td>-</td>
        <td colspan="2"></td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>• Assess  frequency,  cause,  and severity of  past 
<br/>
hospitalizations</td>
<td>✓</td>
<td>-</td>
        <td colspan="2"></td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>Family  history</td>
<td>-</td>
<td></td>
        <td colspan="2"></td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>• Family  history of diabetes in  a  first-degree relative</td>
<td>✓</td>
<td></td>
        <td colspan="2"></td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>• Family  history of  autoimmune  disorders</td>
<td>✓</td>
        <td colspan="2"></td>
<td></td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>Personal  history of complications  and  common 
<br/>
comorbidities</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
        <td colspan="2"></td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>• Common  comorbidities  (e.g.,  obesity,  OSA,  and 
<br/>
MASLD)</td>
<td>✓</td>
<td>-</td>
        <td colspan="2">✓</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>• High  blood  pressure  or abnormal  lipids</td>
<td>✓</td>
<td>-</td>
        <td colspan="2">✓</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>• Macrovascular  and  microvascular complications</td>
<td>✓</td>
<td>-</td>
        <td colspan="2">✓</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>• Hypoglycemia: awareness, frequency,  causes,  and 
<br/>
timing  of episodes</td>
<td>✓</td>
<td>✓</td>
        <td colspan="2">✓</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>• Presence of  hemoglobinopathies  or anemias</td>
<td>✓</td>
<td>-</td>
        <td colspan="2">✓</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>• Last dental visit</td>
<td>✓</td>
        <td rowspan="2">-</td>
        <td colspan="2">✓</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>• Last foot exam</td>
<td>✓</td>
        <td colspan="2">✓</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>• Last dilated eye exam</td>
<td>✓</td>
<td></td>
        <td colspan="2">✓</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>• Visits to  specialists</td>
<td>✓</td>
        <td colspan="2"></td>
<td></td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>• Disability  assessment and  use  of  assistive devices 
<br/>
(e.g.,  physical, cognitive,  vision  and auditory,  history 
<br/>
of  fractures, and  podiatry)</td>
<td>✓</td>
<td>✓</td>
        <td colspan="2">✓</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>• Personal  history of  autoimmune  disease</td>
<td>✓</td>
        <td colspan="2">-</td>
<td>-</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>Surgical and  procedure  history</td>
<td>-</td>
        <td colspan="2">-</td>
<td>-</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>• Surgeries (e.g.,  metabolic surgery and 
<br/>
transplantation)</td>
<td>✓</td>
<td>✓</td>
        <td colspan="2">✓</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>Interval history</td>
<td>-</td>
        <td colspan="2">-</td>
<td>-</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>• Changes  in  medical  or  family  history  since  last visit</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>✓</td>
        <td colspan="2">✓</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>Behavioral  factors</td>
<td>-</td>
        <td colspan="2">-</td>
<td>-</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>• Physical  activity,  sleep  behaviors,  eating  patterns  and 
<br/>
weight  history</td>
<td>✓</td>
<td>✓</td>
        <td colspan="2">✓</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>• Assess  familiarity  with  carbohydrate  counting  (e.g., 
<br/>
type  1  diabetes or  type  2  diabetes treated  with  MDI)</td>
<td>✓</td>
<td>-</td>
        <td colspan="2">✓</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>• Screen  for  OSA</td>
<td>✓</td>
<td>✓</td>
        <td colspan="2">✓</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>• Tobacco,  alcohol,  and  substance  use</td>
<td>✓</td>
<td>-</td>
        <td colspan="2">✓</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>Medications  and  vaccinations</td>
<td>-</td>
        <td colspan="2">-</td>
<td>-</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>• Current medication  plan</td>
<td>✓</td>
<td>✓</td>
        <td colspan="2">✓</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>• Medication-taking  behavior,  including  rationing  of 
<br/>
medications  and/or medical  equipment</td>
<td>✓</td>
<td>✓</td>
        <td colspan="2">✓</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>• Medication  intolerance or side  effects</td>
<td>✓</td>
<td>✓</td>
        <td colspan="2">✓</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>• Complementary  and  alternative medicine  use</td>
<td>✓</td>
<td>✓</td>
        <td colspan="2">✓</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>• Vaccination  history and  needs</td>
<td>✓</td>
<td></td>
        <td colspan="2">✓</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>Technology  use</td>
<td>-</td>
<td></td>
        <td colspan="2"></td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>• Assess  use  of health  apps,  online  education,  patient 
<br/>
portals,  etc.</td>
<td>✓</td>
<td>✓</td>
        <td colspan="2">✓</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>• Glucose monitoring (meter/CGM): results and data use</td>
<td>✓</td>
<td>✓</td>
        <td colspan="2">✓</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>• Review  insulin  pump  settings  and  use  and  connected 
<br/>
pen  and  glucose  data</td>
<td>✓</td>
<td>✓</td>
        <td colspan="2">✓</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>Social  life  assessment</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
        <td colspan="2"></td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>Social  network</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>-</td>
        <td colspan="2"></td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>• Identify existing  social  supports</td>
<td>✓</td>
<td>-</td>
        <td colspan="2">✓</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>• Identify  surrogate  decision  maker and  advanced  care 
<br/>
plan</td>
<td>✓</td>
<td>-</td>
        <td colspan="2">✓</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>• Identify  social  determinants of  health  (e.g.,  food 
<br/>
security,  housing  stability, transportation  access, 
<br/>
financial  security,  and  community  safety)</td>
<td>✓</td>
<td></td>
        <td colspan="2">✓</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td colspan="5">Continued on p. S65</td>
    </tr>
</table>

# IMMUNIZATIONS

> **Recommendation**  
> **4.5** Provide routinely recommended vaccinations for children, adolescents, and adults with diabetes as indicated by age (see **Table 4.3**). **A**

Children, adolescents, and adults with diabetes should receive vaccinations according to age-appropriate recommendations (6,7). The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) provides vaccination schedules specifically for children, adolescents, and adults with diabetes (cdc.gov/vaccines/). The CDC Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP) makes recommendations based on its own review and rating of the evidence, provided in **Table 4.3** for selected vaccinations. The ACIP evidence review has evolved over time with the adoption of Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development, and Evaluation (GRADE) in 2010 and then the Evidence to Decision or Evidence to Recommendation frameworks in 2020 (8). Here, we discuss the particular importance of specific vaccines.

### COVID-19  
People with underlying medical conditions, including diabetes, are more likely to become severely ill with coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19). COVID-19 vaccination using an appropriate number of doses of updated vaccines is recommended for everyone aged 6 months and older in the U.S. (6,7).

### Hepatitis B  
Compared with the general population, people with type 1 or type 2 diabetes have higher rates of hepatitis. Because of the higher likelihood of transmission of the disease, hepatitis B vaccine is recommended for adults with diabetes aged <60 years. For adults aged ≥60 years, hepatitis B vaccine may be administered at the discretion of the treating clinician based on the person’s likelihood of acquiring hepatitis B infection (6,7).

### Influenza  
Influenza is a common, preventable infectious disease associated with high mortality and morbidity in vulnerable populations, including youth, older adults, and people with chronic diseases. Influenza vaccination

2025 December 10 on guest by http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S61/848865/dc26s004.pdf Downloaded from



---


diabetesjournals.org/care     Comprehensive Medical  Evaluation  and  Assessment  of  Comorbidities  S65

<table>
    <thead>
    <tr>
        <th colspan="4">Table 4.1—Continued</th>
        <th></th>
    </tr>
    </thead>
    <tr>
        <td></td>
        <td colspan="4">Visit</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td></td>
<td>Initial</td>
<td>Every  follow-up</td>
        <td colspan="2">Annual</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>• Assess  daily  routine and  environment,  including 
<br/>
school  or  work  schedules  and  ability  to  engage  in 
<br/>
diabetes self-management</td>
<td>✓</td>
<td>✓</td>
        <td colspan="2">✓</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>Physical examination -</td>
<td></td>
<td>-</td>
        <td colspan="2">-</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>• Height,  weight,  and BMI;  growth and  pubertal 
<br/>
development  in  children and  adolescents</td>
<td>✓</td>
<td>✓</td>
        <td colspan="2">✓</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>• Blood  pressure  determination</td>
<td>✓</td>
<td>✓</td>
        <td colspan="2">✓</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>• Orthostatic  blood  pressure  measures (when 
<br/>
indicated)</td>
<td>✓</td>
<td>-</td>
        <td colspan="2">✓</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>• Fundoscopic  examination  (refer to  eye specialist)</td>
<td>✓</td>
<td>-</td>
        <td colspan="2">✓</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>• Thyroid palpation</td>
<td>✓</td>
<td>-</td>
        <td colspan="2">✓</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>• Skin  examination  (e.g.,  acanthosis  nigricans,  insulin 
<br/>
injection  or  insertion  sites,  and  lipodystrophy)</td>
<td>✓</td>
<td>✓</td>
        <td colspan="2">✓</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>• Comprehensive  foot examination,  determination of 
<br/>
temperature,  vibration  or  pinprick  sensation,  and 
<br/>
10-g  monofilament  exam</td>
<td>✓</td>
<td>-</td>
        <td colspan="2">✓</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>• Visual  inspection  (e.g.,  skin  integrity,  callous 
<br/>
formation,  foot deformity or  ulcer,  and  toenails)*</td>
<td>✓</td>
<td>✓</td>
        <td colspan="2">✓</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>• Check  pedal  pulses  and  screen for  PAD  with  ABI 
<br/>
testing if  a  PAD  diagnosis  would  change 
<br/>
management</td>
<td>✓</td>
<td>-</td>
        <td colspan="2">✓</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>• Screen  for depression,  anxiety,  diabetes distress, fear 
<br/>
of  hypoglycemia,  and  disordered eating</td>
<td>✓</td>
<td>-</td>
        <td colspan="2">✓</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>• Assessment  for cognitive  performance  if  indicated</td>
<td>✓</td>
<td>-</td>
        <td colspan="2">✓</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>• Assessment  for  functional  performance  if  indicated</td>
<td>✓</td>
<td>-</td>
        <td colspan="2">✓</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>• Assessment  for  bone  health  (e.g.,  loss  of  height and 
<br/>
kyphosis)</td>
<td>✓</td>
<td>-</td>
        <td colspan="2">✓</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>Laboratory  evaluation -</td>
<td></td>
<td>-</td>
        <td colspan="2">-</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>• A1C,  if  the  results are not available  within  the  past 3 
<br/>
months  or  if earlier assessment  is  necessary</td>
<td>✓</td>
<td>✓</td>
        <td colspan="2">✓</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>• Lipid  profile, including total, LDL,  and  HDL  cholesterol 
<br/>
and  triglycerides‡</td>
<td>✓</td>
<td>-</td>
        <td colspan="2"></td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>• Liver  function  tests (i.e.,  FIB-4)‡</td>
<td>✓</td>
<td>-</td>
        <td colspan="2">✓</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>• Spot  urinary  albumin-to-creatinine  ratio</td>
<td>✓</td>
<td>-</td>
        <td colspan="2">✓</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>• Serum  creatinine and  estimated  glomerular  filtration 
<br/>
rate§</td>
<td>✓</td>
<td>-</td>
        <td colspan="2">✓</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>• Thyroid-stimulating  hormone  in  people  with  type  1 
<br/>
diabetes‡</td>
<td>✓</td>
<td>-</td>
        <td colspan="2">✓</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>• Celiac  disease  screening in  people  with  type  1 
<br/>
diabetesjj</td>
<td>✓</td>
<td>-</td>
        <td colspan="2"></td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>• Vitamin  B12  if  taking metformin  for >5  years</td>
<td>✓</td>
<td></td>
        <td colspan="2">✓</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>• CBC  with  platelets</td>
<td>✓</td>
<td></td>
        <td colspan="2">✓</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>• Serum  potassium  levels in  people  treated  with  ACE 
<br/>
inhibitors, ARBs,  or diuretics§</td>
<td>✓</td>
<td></td>
        <td colspan="2">✓</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td>• Calcium,  vitamin D,  and  phosphorous as  appropriate</td>
<td>✓</td>
<td>-</td>
        <td colspan="2">✓</td>
    </tr>
<tr>
        <td colspan="5">ABI,  ankle  brachial  index;  ARBs,  angiotensin  receptor  blockers;  CBC,  complete  blood  count;  CGM, 
<br/>
continuous  glucose  monitor;  FIB-4,  fibrosis-4  index;  MASLD,  metabolic-associated  steatotic  liver 
<br/>
disease;  MDI,  multiple  daily  injections;  OSA,  obstructive  sleep  apnea;  PAD,  peripheral  arterial  dis-
<br/>
ease. *Should  be  performed  at  every  visit  in  people  with  diabetes  with  sensory  loss,  previous 
<br/>
foot  ulcers, or amputations. †At 65  years  of age  or older. ‡May also  need to  be  checked  after 
<br/>
initiation  or  dose  changes  of  medications  that  affect  these  laboratory  values  (i.e.,  diabetes 
<br/>
medications,  blood  pressure  medications,  cholesterol  medications,  or  thyroid  medications). §May 
<br/>
be  needed  more  frequently  in  people  with  diabetes  with  known  chronic  kidney  disease  or 
<br/>
with  changes  in  medications  that  affect  kidney  function  and  serum  potassium  (see  Table  11.2).
<br/>
jjIn  people  with  presence  of  gastrointestinal  symptoms,  signs,  laboratory  manifestations,  or 
<br/>
clinical  suspicion  suggestive of celiac  disease.</td>
    </tr>
</table>

in people with diabetes has been found to significantly reduce influenza and diabetes-related hospital admissions (9). In people with diabetes, the influenza vaccine has been associated with lower risk of all-cause mortality, cardiovascular mortality, and cardiovascular events (10). Given the benefits of the annual influenza vaccination, it is recommended for all individuals ≥6 months of age who do not have a contraindication. The live attenuated influenza vaccine, which is delivered by nasal spray, is an option for people who are 2–49 years of age and are not pregnant, but people with chronic conditions such as diabetes are cautioned against taking the live attenuated influenza vaccine and are instead recommended to receive the inactive or recombinant influenza vaccination. For the 2025–2026 season, all influenza vaccines offered in the U.S. are trivalent (6,7).

**Pneumococcal Pneumonia**  
Like influenza, pneumococcal pneumonia is a common, preventable disease. People with diabetes are at increased risk for pneumococcal infection and have been reported to have a high risk of hospitalization and death, with a mortality rate as high as 50% (11). All people with diabetes should receive one of the CDC-recommended pneumococcal vaccines (12).

**Respiratory Syncytial Virus**  
Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) is a cause of respiratory illness in some individuals, including older adults. People with chronic conditions such as diabetes have a higher risk of severe illness. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved the first vaccines for prevention of RSV-associated lower respiratory tract disease in adults aged ≥60 years. The ACIP recommends that all adults aged ≥75 years and adults aged 60–74 years who are at increased risk for severe RSV should receive a single dose of RSV vaccine (13).

**ASSESSMENT OF COMORBIDITIES**  
Besides assessing diabetes-related complications, clinicians and people with diabetes need to be aware of common comorbidities that affect people with diabetes and that may complicate its management (14–16). Diabetes comorbidities are conditions that affect people with diabetes more often than age-matched people without diabetes. This section discusses the common comorbidities observed in people with diabetes but is not necessarily inclusive of all the conditions that have been reported.

2025  December 10 on guest by http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S61/848865/dc26s004.pdf Downloaded from


---



S66   Comprehensive Medical  Evaluation  and  Assessment  of  Comorbidities     Diabetes Care Volume  49,  Supplement  1,  January  2026

<table>
<thead>
<tr>
<th colspan="2">Table 4.2—Essential components for assessment, planning, and referral</th>
<th>Bone Health</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>
Assessing risk of diabetes complications
<ul>
<li>ASCVD and heart failure history</li>
<li>ASCVD risk factors and 10-year ASCVD risk assessment</li>
<li>Staging of chronic kidney disease (see <b>Table 11.2</b>)</li>
<li>Hypoglycemia risk (see section 6, “Glycemic Goals, Hypoglycemia, and Hyperglycemic Crises”)</li>
<li>Assessment for retinopathy</li>
<li>Assessment for neuropathy</li>
<li>Assessment for MASLD and MASH</li>
</ul>
</td>
<td>
Goal setting
<ul>
<li>Set A1C, blood glucose, and time-in-range goals</li>
<li>Set lipid goal</li>
<li>If hypertension is present, establish blood pressure goal</li>
<li>Weight management and physical activity goals</li>
<li>Diabetes self-management goals</li>
</ul>
</td>
<td rowspan="4" style="background:#f4cccc;">
<b>Recommendations</b><br>
<b>4.8</b> Assess fracture risk in older adults with diabetes as a part of routine care in diabetes clinical practice, according to risk factors and comorbidities. <b>A</b><br>
<b>4.9</b> Monitor bone mineral density using dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry in older adults with diabetes (aged ≥65 years) and younger individuals with diabetes and multiple risk factors every 2–3 years (<b>Table 4.4</b>). <b>A</b><br>
<b>4.10</b> Consider the potential adverse impact on skeletal health when selecting pharmacological options to lower glucose levels in people with diabetes. Avoiding medications with a known association with higher fracture risk (e.g., thiazolidinediones and sulfonylureas) is recommended, particularly for those at elevated risk for fractures. <b>B</b><br>
<b>4.11</b> To reduce the risk of falls and fractures, glycemic management goals should be individualized for people with diabetes at a higher risk of fracture. <b>C</b> Prioritize use of glucose-lowering medications that are associated with low risk for hypoglycemia to avoid falls. <b>B</b><br>
<b>4.12</b> Advise people with diabetes on their intake of calcium (1,000–1,200 mg/day) and vitamin D to ensure it meets the recommended daily allowance for those at risk for fracture, either through their food choices or supplemental means. <b>B</b><br>
<b>4.13a</b> Consider osteoporosis drug therapy in older adults with diabetes who are at increased risk of fracture, including those with low bone mineral density (T-score ≤−2.5), history of fragility fracture, or elevated Fracture Risk Assessment Tool score (≥3% for hip fracture or ≥20% for major osteoporotic fracture). <b>B</b><br>
<b>4.13b</b> Treatment may be considered for adults with diabetes with a T-score between −2.0 and −2.5 in the presence of additional risk factors for fracture. <b>C</b>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
Therapeutic treatment plans
<ul>
<li>Lifestyle management (e.g., registered dietitian nutritionist)</li>
<li>Pharmacologic therapy: glucose lowering</li>
<li>Pharmacologic therapy: cardiovascular and kidney disease risk factors</li>
<li>Weight management with pharmacotherapy or metabolic surgery, as appropriate</li>
<li>Use of glucose monitoring and insulin delivery devices</li>
<li>Referral to diabetes education and medical specialists (as needed)</li>
</ul>
</td>
<td>
Referrals for initial care management
<ul>
<li>Eye care professional for annual dilated eye exam</li>
<li>Family planning for individuals of childbearing potential</li>
<li>Registered dietitian nutritionist for medical nutrition therapy</li>
<li>Diabetes self-management education and support</li>
<li>Dentist for comprehensive dental and periodontal examination</li>
<li>Behavioral health professional, if indicated</li>
<li>Audiology, if indicated</li>
<li>Social worker and community resources, if indicated</li>
<li>Rehabilitation medicine or another relevant health care professional for physical and cognitive disability evaluation, if indicated</li>
<li>Other appropriate health care professionals</li>
</ul>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="2">
Assessment and treatment planning are essential components of initial and all follow-up visits. ASCVD, atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease; MASH, metabolic dysfunction-associated steatohepatitis; MASLD, metabolic dysfunction-associated steatotic liver disease.
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## Autoimmune Diseases

> **Recommendations**  
> **4.6** Screen people with type 1 diabetes for autoimmune thyroid disease soon after diagnosis and thereafter at repeated intervals if clinically indicated. **B**  
> **4.7** Adults with type 1 diabetes should be screened for celiac disease in the presence of gastrointestinal symptoms, signs, laboratory manifestations, or clinical suspicion suggestive of celiac disease. **B**

People with type 1 diabetes are at increased risk for other autoimmune diseases, with thyroid disease, celiac disease, and pernicious anemia (vitamin B12 deficiency) being among the most common (17). Other autoimmune conditions associated with type 1 diabetes include autoimmune liver disease, primary adrenal insufficiency (Addison disease), vitiligo, collagen vascular diseases, and myasthenia gravis (18,19). Type 1 diabetes may also occur with other autoimmune diseases in the context of specific genetic disorders such as polyglandular autoimmune syndromes (20). Given the high prevalence, nonspecific symptoms, and insidious onset of primary hypothyroidism, routine screening for thyroid dysfunction is recommended for all people with type 1 diabetes. Screening for celiac disease should be considered in adults with diabetes with suggestive symptoms (e.g., diarrhea, malabsorption, and abdominal pain) or signs (e.g., osteoporosis, vitamin deficiencies, and iron deficiency anemia) (21). Measurement of vitamin B12 levels (and reflex methylmalonic acid) should be considered for people with type 1 diabetes and peripheral neuropathy or unexplained anemia.

Determination of fracture risk traditionally has relied on measurements of bone mineral density (BMD) and the World Health Organization–defined T-score of ≤−2.5 SD. However, it is now established that the consideration of other risk factors improves the categorization of fracture risk.



---



diabetesjournals.org/care     Comprehensive Medical  Evaluation  and  Assessment  of  Comorbidities  S67

<table>
<thead>
<tr>
<th colspan="6">Table 4.3—Highly recommended immunizations for people with diabetes (from the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices and Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<th>Vaccine</th>
<th>Recommended ages</th>
<th>Schedule</th>
<th>GRADE evidence type*</th>
<th>References</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>COVID-19</td>
<td>All people 6 months of age and older</td>
<td>Current initial vaccination and boosters</td>
<td>3</td>
<td>Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Interim Clinical Considerations for Use of COVID-19 Vaccines in the United States (305)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Hepatitis B</td>
<td>Adults with diabetes aged &lt;60 years; for adults aged ≥60 years, hepatitis B vaccine may be administered at the discretion of the treating clinician based on the person’s likelihood of acquiring hepatitis B infection</td>
<td>–</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>Sandul et al., Updated Recommendation for Universal Hepatitis B Vaccination in Adults Aged 19–59 Years - United States, 2024 (306)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Influenza</td>
<td>All people with diabetes advised to receive a trivalent influenza vaccine and not to receive live attenuated influenza vaccine</td>
<td>Annual</td>
<td>3</td>
<td>Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices Recommended Immunization Schedule for Children and Adolescents Aged 18 Years or Younger - United States, 2025, and Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices Recommended Immunization Schedule for Adults Aged 19 Years or Older - United States, 2025 (6,7)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td rowspan="2">Pneumonia (PPSV23 [Pneumovax])</td>
<td>19–64 years of age, vaccinate with Pneumovax</td>
<td>One dose is recommended for those who previously received PCV13; if PCV15 was used, follow with PPSV23 ≥1 year later; PPSV23 is not indicated after PCV20; adults who received only PPSV23 may receive PCV15 or PCV20 ≥1 year after their last dose</td>
<td>2</td>
<td>Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices Recommended Immunization Schedule for Children and Adolescents Aged 18 Years or Younger - United States, 2025, and Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices Recommended Immunization Schedule for Adults Aged 19 Years or Older - United States, 2025 (6,7)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>≥65 years of age</td>
<td>One dose is recommended for those who previously received PCV13; if PCV15 was used, follow with PPSV23 ≥1 year later; PPSV23 is not indicated after PCV20; adults who received only PPSV23 may receive PCV15 or PCV20 ≥1 year after their last dose</td>
<td>2</td>
<td>Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices Recommended Immunization Schedule for Children and Adolescents Aged 18 Years or Younger - United States, 2025, and Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices Recommended Immunization Schedule for Adults Aged 19 Years or Older - United States, 2025 (6,7)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>PCV20 or PCV15</td>
<td>Adults 19–64 years of age with an immunocompromising condition (e.g., chronic renal failure), cochlear implant, or cerebrospinal fluid leak  
Adults 19–64 years of age, immunocompetent  
≥65 years of age, immunocompetent, have shared decision-making</td>
<td>One dose of PCV15 or PCV20 is recommended by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention  
For those who have never received any pneumococcal vaccine, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention</td>
<td>2</td>
<td>Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices Recommended Immunization Schedule for Children and Adolescents Aged 18 Years or Younger - United States, 2025, and Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices Recommended Immunization Schedule for Adults Aged 19</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

Continued on p. S68



---



Comprehensive Medical Evaluation and Assessment of Comorbidities     Diabetes Care Volume 49, Supplement 1, January 2026

<table>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Vaccine</th>
<th>Recommended ages</th>
<th>Schedule</th>
<th>GRADE evidence type*</th>
<th>References</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>discussion with health care professionals</td>
<td>
recommends one dose of PCV15 or PCV20<br>
One dose of PCV15 or PCV20; PCSV23 may be given ≥8 weeks after PCV15; PPSV23 is not indicated after PCV20
</td>
<td></td>
<td>Years or Older - United States, 2025 (6,7)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>RSV</td>
<td>Older adults ≥60 years of age with diabetes appear to be a risk group</td>
<td>
Adults aged ≥75 years and those aged ≥60 years and at high risk may receive a single dose of an RSV vaccine
</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>
Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices Recommended Immunization Schedule for Children and Adolescents Aged 18 Years or Younger - United States, 2025, and Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices Recommended Immunization Schedule for Adults Aged 19 Years or Older - United States, 2025 (6,7)
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Tetanus, diphtheria, pertussis (Tdap)</td>
<td>All adults; pregnant individuals should have an extra dose</td>
<td>Booster every 10 years</td>
<td>2</td>
<td>
Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices Recommended Immunization Schedule for Children and Adolescents Aged 18 Years or Younger - United States, 2025, and Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices Recommended Immunization Schedule for Adults Aged 19 Years or Older - United States, 2025 (6,7)
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Zoster</td>
<td>≥50 years of age</td>
<td>Two-dose Shingrix, even if previously vaccinated</td>
<td>1</td>
<td>
Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices Recommended Immunization Schedule for Children and Adolescents Aged 18 Years or Younger - United States, 2025, and Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices Recommended Immunization Schedule for Adults Aged 19 Years or Older - United States, 2025 (6,7)
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

For a comprehensive list of vaccines, refer to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention web site at cdc.gov/vaccines/. Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices recommendations can be found at cdc.gov/acip/?CDC_AAref_Val=https://cdc.gov/vaccines/acip/recommendations. COVID-19, coronavirus disease 2019; GRADE, Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development, and Evaluation; PCV13, 13-valent pneumococcal conjugate vaccine; PCV15, 15-valent pneumococcal conjugate vaccine; PCV 20, 20-valent pneumococcal conjugate vaccine; PPSV23, 23-valent pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccine; RSV, respiratory syncytial virus.  
*Evidence type:  
1, randomized controlled trials (RCTs) or overwhelming evidence from observational studies;  
2, RCTs with important limitations or exceptionally strong evidence from observational studies;  
3, observational studies or RCTs with notable limitations;  
4, clinical experience and observations, observational studies with important limitations, or RCTs with several major limitations.

----

**(Table 4.4).** There are factors beyond BMD that contribute to bone strength in people with diabetes.

A low-trauma fracture (defined as a fracture occurring from minimal trauma, such as falling from standing height or less) of the hip, pelvis, vertebra, or forearm in adults aged ≥65 years is diagnostic of osteoporosis, regardless of BMD. Such fractures are among the strongest predictors of future fracture risk, especially in the first 1–2 years after a fracture (22,23). Osteoporotic fractures, especially those of the hip, are associated with significant morbidity, mortality, and societal costs (24). It is estimated that 20% of individuals do not survive to 1 year after hip fracture, while 60% do

2025 December 10 on guest by http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S61/848865/dc26s004.pdf Downloaded from



---



diabetesjournals.org/care     Comprehensive Medical  Evaluation  and  Assessment  of  Comorbidities  S69

# Table 4.4—Diagnostic assessment

<table>
<thead>
<tr>
<th colspan="2">Individuals who should receive BMD testing</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>People aged ≥65 years</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="2">Postmenopausal women and men aged ≥50 years with history of adult-age fracture or with diabetes-specific risk factors:</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="2">
<ul>
<li>Frequent hypoglycemic events</li>
<li>Diabetes duration &gt;10 years</li>
<li>Diabetes medications: insulin, thiazolidinediones, sulfonylureas</li>
<li>A1C &gt;8%</li>
<li>Peripheral or autonomic neuropathy, retinopathy, nephropathy</li>
<li>Frequent falls</li>
<li>Glucocorticoid use: prednisone at doses &gt;2.5 mg per day for ≥3 months</li>
</ul>
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

not regain their prior functionality, living with permanent disability (25).

Hip fractures in people with diabetes are associated with higher risk of mortality (28% in women and 57% in men), longer recovery, and delayed healing (26) compared with individuals without diabetes.

## Epidemiology and Risk Factors

Age-specific fracture risk is significantly increased in people with type 1 or type 2 diabetes in both sexes, with a 34% increase in fracture risk compared with those without diabetes (27).

### Type 1 Diabetes

Fracture risk in people with type 1 diabetes is increased by 4.35 times for hip fractures, 1.83 times for upper-limb fractures, and 1.97 times for ankle fractures (28). Fractures occur at young ages, 10–15 years earlier than they do in people without diabetes. Type 1 diabetes is often associated with low bone mass, although BMD underestimates the high risk of fracture observed in young individuals (28). Risk of fracture is increased in people with type 1 diabetes with microvascular complications or neuropathy compared with those without these complications (26). Moreover, average A1C >7.9% (risk ratio [RR] 3.57 [CI 1.08–11.78]), duration of diabetes >26 years (RR 7.6 [CI 1.67–34.6]), and family history of fractures (RR 2.64 [CI 1.15–6.09]) have been independently associated with high risk of nonvertebral fractures (29).

### Type 2 Diabetes

In people with type 2 diabetes, even with normal or higher BMD, hip fracture risk is increased by 1.79 times, and risk throughout life is 40–70% higher than in it is in individuals without diabetes (27,30,31). According to a meta-analysis that included 15 studies, people with type 2 diabetes had a 35% higher incidence of vertebral fractures, causing increased risk of mortality (hazard ratio [HR] 2.11 [95% CI 1.72–2.59]) (32). Fracture risk is also increased in the upper limbs and ankle. Despite normal to high BMD compared with individuals without type 2 diabetes, the velocity of bone loss with age is greater in individuals with type 2 diabetes, and low BMD remains a risk factor for fractures (33,34).

Glycemic management significantly impacts fracture risk in people with diabetes. A meta-analysis revealed an 8% increased fracture risk per 1% rise in A1C level (RR 1.08 [95% CI 1.03–1.14]) (35). Poor glycemic management (A1C >9%) over 2 years in individuals with type 2 diabetes correlated with a 29% heightened fracture risk (36). Notably, this risk was higher among White individuals than in other racial groups. Hypoglycemia also escalates the risk of fractures at the hip and other skeletal sites (RR 1.52 [95% CI 1.23–1.88]) (35). A Japanese study echoed these findings, showing a fracture risk increase (HR 2.24 [95% CI 1.56–3.21]) with severe hypoglycemia episodes (37).

Longer diabetes duration further elevates fracture risk (38,39). Data indicate individuals who have had type 2 diabetes for >10 years face significantly higher fracture risks. Longer duration of disease may be associated with deposition of advanced glycation end products into the bone matrix, microvascular damage, and a proinflammatory state, which all impair bone cell activity and bone microdamage repair (40). Additionally, high fracture risk is seen in people with CVD, nephropathy, retinopathy, neuropathy, poor physical function, and frequent falls (41–43).

### Screening

Most evidence on screening in individuals at risk for fracture is available from people with type 2 diabetes; fracture risk prediction using BMD in type 1 diabetes has not been extensively studied. Health care professionals should assess fracture history and risk factors in people with diabetes and recommend measurement of BMD if appropriate according to the individual’s age and sex.

**Type 2 Diabetes.** People with type 2 diabetes have 5–10% higher BMD than people without diabetes, although they present with lower bone strength, impaired bone microarchitecture, and accelerated bone loss (33,44–46). Fracture risk was higher in large observational studies in participants with diabetes compared with those without diabetes for a given T-score and age (34). Therefore, a T-score adjustment of −0.5 has been proposed to improve fracture prediction by dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry (DXA). For example, a T-score ≤−2.0 should be interpreted as equivalent to −2.5 in a person without diabetes.

Notably, the Fracture Risk Assessment Tool (FRAX), a medical calculator that predicts 10-year risk of fractures, does not incorporate type 2 diabetes as a risk factor and thus has also been shown to underestimate fracture risk for this population (34). Building on the recognized limitations of FRAX in type 2 diabetes, multiple large cohort studies and meta-analyses consistently demonstrate that type 2 diabetes is an independent risk factor for fracture and that FRAX systematically underestimates fracture risk in this population. This underestimation is observed across diverse ethnic groups, increases with longer diabetes duration, and is particularly pronounced for hip fractures and in older adults with diabetes. Several strategies have been proposed to improve FRAX performance in type 2 diabetes, including

1. using the rheumatoid arthritis input as a surrogate for diabetes,
2. lowering the femoral neck T-score input by 0.5 SD,
3. increasing the age by 10 years, or
4. incorporating trabecular bone score adjustments (47–49).

However, recent findings indicate that fracture risk may be similar for a given femoral neck T-score in people with and without diabetes (39).

Fracture risk prediction may be enhanced by use of trabecular bone score (50,51), although such studies are not available for individuals with type 1 diabetes.

2025  December 10 on guest by http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S61/848865/dc26s004.pdf Downloaded from



---



S70   Comprehensive Medical  Evaluation  and  Assessment  of  Comorbidities     Diabetes Care Volume  49,  Supplement  1,  January  2026

diabetes and are based on data from the U.S. or Canada.  
In people with type 2 diabetes, BMD should be monitored by DXA scan in older adults (aged ≥65 years) in the absence of other comorbidities and in younger individuals (≥50 years of age) with bone or diabetes-related risk factors, such as insulin use or diabetes duration >10 years (**Table 4.4**). Reassessment is recommended every 2–3 years (48), depending on the screening evaluation, antiosteoporosis medication initiation/monitoring, and the presence of additional risk factors, although the evidence on how frequently DXA should be repeated is less robust. According to the European Association for the Study of Obesity (EASO), DXA should be performed every 2 years in individuals undergoing metabolic surgery.

DXA-assisted vertebral fracture assessment is a convenient and low-cost method to assess vertebral fractures, although traditional lateral thoracic/lumbar spine X-ray is still considered the gold standard (52). MRI or computed tomography imaging studies performed for other purposes should be analyzed for presence of vertebral fractures as well as chest X-rays in hospitalized individuals.

## Type 1 Diabetes

Because hip fracture risk in type 1 diabetes starts to increase after the age of 50 years, clinicians may consider assessing BMD after the 5th decade of life or earlier in the presence of low-trauma fracture or additional risk factors for bone loss (28). In people with type 1 diabetes, BMD underestimates fracture risk, but studies do not address the extent of underestimation of fracture risk.

According to the International Society for Pediatric and Adolescent Diabetes (ISPAD), regular assessment of bone health using bone densitometry in children and adolescents with type 1 diabetes is still controversial and not recommended, but it may be considered in association with celiac disease (51).

### Management

Appropriate glycemic management and minimizing hypoglycemic episodes are crucial for bone health in people with diabetes. Individuals with prolonged disease, microvascular and macrovascular complications, or frequent hypoglycemic episodes face higher fracture risks and fall risks due to factors like poor vision, neuropathy, sarcopenia, and impaired gait. Health care professionals should advocate for moderate physical activity to enhance muscle health, gait coordination, and balance as part of fracture preventive strategies (42,43,53). For specific recommendations on physical activity for older adults, please refer to section 13, “Older Adults.”

Osteoporosis and fracture prevention are first based on measures applied to the general population. All people with diabetes should receive an adequate daily intake of protein, calcium, and vitamin D and stop smoking (54–56). All individuals should engage in regular physical activity, including aerobic activities and weight-bearing, flexibility, and balance exercise.

Intake of calcium (1,000–1,200 mg) should reflect the age-specific recommendations for the general population and should be obtained through nutrition plan and/or oral supplements (57).

The optimal level of 25-hydroxyvitamin D is a matter of controversy (58), although serum levels 20–30 ng/mL are generally thought to be sufficient (59). For individuals receiving antiresorptive therapy (including bisphosphonate therapy), a 25-hydroxyvitamin D level of >30 ng/mL has been recommended (60,61).

The safe upper limit is also a matter of debate, and there is substantial disagreement over whether to treat to a specified serum level. In the U.S., the recommended daily allowance of vitamin D is 600 IU for people aged 51–70 years and 800 IU for people aged >70 years (59). In clinical practice, this dose of supplement may not be sufficient to reach recommended serum levels of vitamin D, particularly in those at risk for vitamin D deficiency, and therefore supplementation should be individualized. Of note, recent draft recommendations made by the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force caution against supplementation with vitamin D (with or without calcium) for the primary prevention of fractures in community-dwelling postmenopausal women and men aged 60 years or older (62).

Fractures are important outcomes of frailty, a predisability condition that should be mitigated with individualized interventions to prevent falls, maintain mobility, and delay disability (63). In many circumstances, conservative management (calcium, vitamin D, and lifestyle measures) are not enough to reduce fracture risk.

When pharmacological treatment is needed, treatment initiation strategies are the same as those used for the general population. Antiosteoporosis medications reduce bone resorption (bisphosphonates, selective estrogen receptor modulators, and denosumab), stimulate bone formation (teriparatide and abaloparatide), or have dual actions by stimulating bone formation and reducing bone resorption (romosozumab). These agents improve bone density and reduce the risk of vertebral and nonvertebral fractures. Although there are no studies specifically designed for people with diabetes, data on antiresorptive and osteoanabolic agents suggest efficacy in type 2 diabetes is similar to that for individuals without diabetes (64–66). Using individual participant data from randomized trials, antiresorptive therapies reduce fracture risk in people with and without type 2 diabetes for vertebral, hip, and nonvertebral fractures (64). No similar studies of efficacy of antiosteoporosis treatment in people with type 1 diabetes have been published.

### Primary Prevention of Fragility Fractures in People With Diabetes

In the general population, it is recommended that people with diabetes with a T-score ≤−2.5 or an elevated FRAX score (≥3% for hip fracture or ≥20% for major osteoporotic fracture) should be considered for pharmacological treatment with first-line drug therapy (alendronate, risedronate, ibandronate, and zoledronate or denosumab). In type 2 diabetes, since T-score underestimates fracture risk (as discussed above), pharmacological treatment should be strongly considered for adults with diabetes with a T-score between −2.0 and −2.5 in the presence of additional risk factors for fracture such as falls and elevated FRAX score.

The risk of hypocalcemia associated with denosumab use in individuals with CKD is markedly increased in advanced CKD (estimated glomerular filtration rate <30 mL/min/1.73 m²) and is highest in dialysis-dependent individuals. This risk must be proactively managed with pretreatment assessment, supplementation, close monitoring, and specialist consultation. Data from a phase 3 trial, Future Revascularization Evaluation in Patients With Diabetes Mellitus: Optimal Management of Multivessel Disease (FREEDOM), and its 10-year extension have shown that people with diabetes treated with denosumab

2025  December 10 on guest by http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S61/848865/dc26s004.pdf Downloaded



---


diabetesjournals.org/care     Comprehensive Medical  Evaluation  and  Assessment  of  Comorbidities  S71

experienced positive effects on fasting glucose (67) and significant improvements in BMD and lower vertebral fracture risk (49). However, according to a post hoc subgroup analysis, a higher risk of nonvertebral fractures was observed in people with diabetes treated with denosumab (49). Self-management abilities of the person with diabetes should be considered in medication selection because inability to maintain the every 6-month denosumab injection schedule can lead to rebound bone loss and spontaneous vertebral fractures, careful individual selection and counseling are important prior to drug initiation. Bisphosphonate therapy (oral or intravenous) may be more appropriate in individuals with poor medication-taking behavior or gaps in access to medical care. As diabetes is a low-bone-turnover condition, very-high-risk individuals should be considered for osteoanabolic therapy (teriparatide, abaloparatide, romosozumab). Teriparatide showed positive effects on BMD and fracture risk in people with diabetes (65,66).

Romosozumab received FDA approval only for postmenopausal women with a box warning because it may increase risk of myocardial infarction, stroke, or cardiovascular death. Although real-world data suggests that romosozumab may not lead to an increase in cardiac events (68), it should not be prescribed in individuals who experienced a myocardial infarction or a stroke within the past year (69,70). Osteoanabolic treatments must be followed by antiresorptives to preserve BMD gains. Without consolidation, BMD declines within a year as increased bone turnover leads to rapid loss of newly formed bone.

### Secondary Prevention of Fragility Fractures

The risk of subsequent low-trauma fracture (hip, spine, nonvertebral site) is high, especially in the first 1–2 years after a fracture. Antiosteoporosis treatment reduces the risk of fracture in older individuals with prior hip or vertebral fracture.

As in the general population, people with diabetes who experience fragility fracture should  
* 1) be given the diagnosis of osteoporosis regardless of bone density data and  
* 2) receive the appropriate work-up and therapy to prevent future fractures (71).  

Individuals on long-term treatment with antiosteoporosis medications, with multiple fragility fractures, or with multiple comorbidities should be referred to a bone metabolic specialist. In these more complicated cases, a bone specialist may choose to initiate an osteoanabolic agent to optimize bone formation and reduce immediate fracture risk (72). It is strongly recommended that all individuals with a fragility fracture be started on antiosteoporosis therapy and adequate calcium and vitamin D supplementation (if required) as soon as possible. In the appropriate individual, therapy may even be initiated during an inpatient stay to reduce care delays (71).

### Glucose-Lowering Medications and Bone Health

Care plans for type 2 diabetes treatment should consider individual fracture risk and the potential effect of medications on bone metabolism. Metformin has a safe bone health profile (73,74). Studies have reported increased fracture incidences in women using thiazolidinediones (TZD), with the risk doubling with 1–2 years of TZD use compared with placebo or other glucose-lowering medications (HR 2.23 [95% CI 1.65–3.01]) (75,76). According to the Action to Control Cardiovascular Risk in Diabetes (ACCORD) study, reduced risk is noted in women who had discontinued TZD use for 1–2 years (HR 0.57 [95% CI 0.35–0.92]) or >2 years (HR 0.42 [95% CI 0.24–0.74]) compared with current users (77). Furthermore, individuals with type 2 diabetes on sulfonylureas exhibit a heightened fracture risk (RR 1.30 [95% CI 1.18–1.43]) (78) because of accelerated bone loss (46) and a higher rate of hypoglycemic events, which can trigger falls and fractures (79). Dipeptidyl peptidase 4 inhibitors have been used in clinical practice for more than 15 years, and both clinical trials and postmarketing data suggest a neutral impact on bone health (80,81). Glucagon-like peptide 1 receptor agonists (GLP-1 RAs) at low doses are likely neutral to beneficial with respect to BMD and fracture risk (82), though data are lacking for higher doses in which weight loss may be higher and more rapid with potential counteractive skeletal risk. Use of sodium–glucose cotransporter 2 (SGLT2) inhibitors has raised some concerns. The Canagliflozin Cardiovascular Assessment Study (CANVAS) showed that the proportion of subjects with fracture was higher in the canagliflozin groups than the non-canagliflozin groups (2.7% vs. 1.9%, respectively). Further analyses from the same trial and from the Canagliflozin and Renal Events in Diabetes with Established Nephropathy Clinical Evaluation (CREDENCE) study found a neutral effect on fracture risk (83–86). Although few data are available, use of empagliflozin, ertugliflozin, or dapagliflozin has not been associated with negative effects on bone health (85–87). Use of insulin has been shown to be associated with a doubling of the risk of hip fractures (79), likely because of higher risk of hypoglycemia, longer duration of the disease, and comorbidities that may contribute to diminished bone strength.

In conclusion, glucose-lowering medications with a good bone safety profile are preferred. This is especially true in older adults, in people with longer duration of diabetes, or in people with complications. Aggressive therapeutic approaches should be avoided in those who are frail and in older adults to prevent hypoglycemic events and falls.

### Cancer

Diabetes is associated with increased risk of cancers of the liver, pancreas, endometrium, colon and rectum, breast, and bladder (88). The association may result from shared risk factors between type 2 diabetes and cancer (older age, obesity, and physical inactivity) but may also be due to diabetes-related factors (89), such as underlying disease physiology or diabetes treatments, although evidence for these links is scarce. People with diabetes should be encouraged to undergo recommended age-and sex-appropriate cancer screenings, coordinated with their primary health care professional, and to reduce their modifiable cancer risk factors (obesity, physical inactivity, alcohol use, and smoking). New onset of atypical diabetes (lean body habitus and negative family history) in a middle-aged or older person may precede the diagnosis of pancreatic adenocarcinoma (90). Additionally, in a nationwide cancer registry in New Zealand, postpancreatitis diabetes mellitus was associated with significantly higher risk (2.4-fold) of pancreatic cancer compared with pancreatitis after type 2 diabetes (91). However, in the absence of other symptoms (e.g., weight loss and abdominal pain), routine screening for pancreatic cancer is not currently recommended. Metformin and sulfonylureas may have anticancer properties. Data for pioglitazone are mixed, with a previous concern for bladder cancer association. Recommendations cannot be made at this time (92–94). Thus far, the use of GLP-1 RAs has not been shown to be



---



Comprehensive Medical Evaluation and Assessment of Comorbidities     Diabetes Care Volume 49, Supplement 1, January 2026

associated with the incidence of thyroid cancer, pancreatic cancer, or any other type of cancer in humans (95,96). For information on glycemic management in the context of cancer treatment, see section 9, “Pharmacologic Approaches to Glycemic Treatment.”

## Cognitive Impairment/Dementia

> **Recommendation**  
> **4.14** In the presence of cognitive impairment, diabetes treatment plans should be simplified as much as possible and tailored to minimize the risk of hypoglycemia. **B**

Diabetes is associated with a significantly increased risk and rate of cognitive decline and an increased risk of dementia (97). A meta-analysis of 122 prospective observational studies found that individuals with diabetes had a 43% higher risk of all types of dementia, a 43% higher risk of Alzheimer dementia, and a 91% higher risk of vascular dementia compared with individuals without diabetes (97). In a 15-year prospective study of community-dwelling people >60 years of age, the presence of diabetes at baseline significantly increased the age- and sex-adjusted incidence of all-cause dementia, Alzheimer dementia, and vascular dementia compared with rates in those with normal glucose tolerance (98). The reverse is also true: people with Alzheimer dementia are more likely to develop diabetes than people without Alzheimer dementia, possibly linking critical metabolic processes that contribute to neurodegeneration (99). A new clinical entity of diabetes-related dementia is being recognized as distinct from Alzheimer dementia or vascular dementia. It is characterized by slow progression of dementia, absence of typical neuroimaging findings seen in Alzheimer or vascular dementia, old age, high A1C levels, long duration of diabetes, high frequency of insulin use, frailty, and sarcopenia or dynapenia (100). See section 13, “Older Adults,” for a more detailed discussion regarding assessment of cognitive impairment.

### Glycemic Status and Cognition

In individuals with diabetes, higher A1C level is associated with lower cognitive function (101). A meta-analysis of randomized trials found that intensive glycemic management, compared with higher A1C goals, was associated with a slightly lower rate of cognitive decline. However, these findings were driven by an older study with an A1C goal of <7.0% in the intensive treatment arm. Analyses within the ACCORD, Action in Diabetes and Vascular Disease: Preterax and Diamicron MR Controlled Evaluation (ADVANCE), and Veterans Affairs Diabetes Trial (VADT) studies found that intensive glycemic management (A1C goal of <6.0–6.5%) resulted in no differences in cognitive outcomes compared with standard control (102,103).

Results from the China Health and Retirement Study (CHARLS) report that in adults aged >45 years with type 2 diabetes, excessively low and high A1C levels (>9%) were associated with increased risk of cognitive impairment (104). Therefore, intensive glycemic management should not be advised for the improvement of cognitive function in individuals with type 2 diabetes. Additionally, people with type 2 diabetes and dementia are at heightened risk for experiencing hyperglycemic crises (diabetic ketoacidosis and hyperglycemic hyperosmolar state) compared with people without dementia (105), underscoring the importance of supporting and simplifying diabetes management for individuals experiencing cognitive decline and diminished capacity for self-care. In addition, these individuals have increased difficulty with complex treatment and monitoring plans and are at risk for frailty, hypoglycemia, and disability (106).

In type 2 diabetes, severe hypoglycemia is associated with reduced cognitive function, and those with poor cognitive function have more severe or repeated episodes of hypoglycemia. Multiple observational studies of adults with diabetes have found an association between severe hypoglycemic episodes and cognitive decline or incident dementia (107–110). Decreased cognitive function also increases the risk for severe hypoglycemia, likely through impaired ability to recognize and respond appropriately to hypoglycemic symptoms (107,111,112). Additionally, long-term follow up of Diabetes Control and Complications Trial/Epidemiology of Diabetes Interventions and Complications (DCCT/EDIC) showed recurrent severe hypoglycemia was associated with the highest risk of long-term psychomotor and mental function decline (113). Simplifying or deintensifying glycemic therapy and/or liberalizing A1C goals may prevent hypoglycemia in individuals with cognitive dysfunction. See section 13, “Older Adults,” for more detailed discussion of hypoglycemia in older people with type 1 and type 2 diabetes.

## Dental Care

> **Recommendations**  
> **4.15** People with diabetes should be referred for a dental exam at least once per year. **E**  
> **4.16** Coordinate efforts between the medical and dental teams to appropriately adjust glucose-lowering medication and treatment plans prior to and in the postdental procedure period as needed. **B**

Periodontal disease is more severe, and may be more prevalent, in people with diabetes than in those without and has been associated with higher A1C levels (114,115). Longitudinal studies suggest that people with periodontal disease have higher rates of incident diabetes, suggesting a bidirectional relationship between diabetes and periodontal disease. Current evidence suggests that periodontal disease adversely affects diabetes outcomes, and periodontal treatment using subgingival instrumentation may improve glycemic outcomes (116,117).

The proportion of U.S. adults with diabetes seeing a dentist in the past year was significantly lower than that of individuals without diabetes (56.7% vs. 65.4%). The majority of clinicians do not discuss oral health with individuals (118). Increased engagement in toothbrushing has been shown to be associated with improved oral health and better glycemic management in people with type 2 diabetes (119). Dental health professionals should be included in the diabetes care team when possible, using a collaborative interprofessional care approach (120). Early detection of oral health problems by clinicians may be helpful to promote prompt referral to dental care and mitigate the expensive and extensive procedures needed to treat advanced oral disease (121,122). Clinical assessment of people with diabetes should include a dental history and an oral examination, and dental professionals should be informed about key aspects of the person’s

2025 December 10 on guest by http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S61/848865/dc26s004.pdf Downloaded from



---



diabetesjournals.org/care     Comprehensive Medical  Evaluation  and  Assessment  of  Comorbidities  S73

health and diabetes treatment plan, including glycemic goals, medications, and comorbid conditions (121,122). It is important for dental professionals to know when people with diabetes have high A1C levels, as this population may have lower oral healing capacity (123,124). Hepatic, cardiovascular, kidney, and pulmonary conditions should also be known by dental professionals to assist in appropriate dosing of antibiotics and other medications. Coordination between dental professionals and the diabetes care team will be especially important for people treated with insulin, sulfonylureas, or meglitinides who are at risk for hypoglycemia during dental procedures, especially if fasting. Hypoglycemia can be mitigated by medication adjustment, blood glucose monitoring before and during the procedure, and treatment of hypoglycemia if appropriate. Therefore, dental professionals caring for people with diabetes should have access to blood glucose monitors during procedures as well as carbohydrates and glucagon to treat any hypoglycemia that occurs.

## Disability

> **Recommendation 4.17**  
> Assess for disability at the initial visit and for decline in function at each subsequent visit in people with diabetes. If a disability is impacting functional ability or capacity to manage their diabetes, a referral should be made to an appropriate health care professional specializing in disability (e.g., physical medicine and rehabilitation specialist, physical therapist, occupational therapist, or speech-language pathologist). **C**

A disability is defined as a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more major life activities of an individual (125,126). Activities of daily living (ADLs) and instrumental activities of daily living (IADLs) comprise basic and complex life care tasks, respectively. The capacity to accomplish such tasks serves as an important measure of function. Diabetes is associated with an increase in the risk of work and physical disability, with estimates of 50–80% increased risk of disability for people with diabetes compared with people without diabetes (127). Reviews have shown that lower-body functional limitation was the most prevalent disability (47–84%) among people with diabetes (128,129). In a systematic review and meta-analysis, the presence of diabetes increased the risk of mobility disability (15 studies; odds ratio [OR] 1.71 [95% CI 1.53–1.91]; RR 1.51 [95% CI 1.38–1.64]), of IADL disability (10 studies; OR 1.65 [95% CI 1.55–1.74]), and of ADL disability (16 studies; OR 1.82 [95% CI 1.63–2.04]; RR 1.82 [95% CI 1.40–2.36]) (127). In a meta-analysis, diabetes was shown to be associated with an increased risk of falls in older adults; falls occurred in 25% of individuals with diabetes compared with 18.2% of those without diabetes (130). The mechanisms underlying disability are multifactorial and include obesity, coronary artery disease, stroke, lower extremity complications, and physiological factors such as hyperglycemia, sarcopenia, inflammation, and insulin resistance (131).

Diabetic peripheral neuropathy (DPN) is a common complication of both type 1 and 2 diabetes and may cause impaired postural balance and gait kinematics (132), leading to functional disability. DPN can be found in up to half of people with type 1 or type 2 diabetes, resulting in physical disability, and neuropathic pain, resulting in a diminished quality of life (133). Glycemic management prevents DPN development in type 1 diabetes; in contrast, glycemic management has modest or no benefit in individuals with type 2 diabetes, possibly due to the combined effect of coexisting comorbidities (133). People with lower-extremity involvement due to DPN have 3 times more risk of restricted mobility, resulting in them experiencing more physical dysfunctions and impairments than people who have diabetes but not neuropathy (134). Furthermore, DPN may progress to nontraumatic lower-limb amputation, which significantly impacts quality of life (135).

In addition to complications of diabetes from microvascular conditions such as CKD, retinopathy, autonomic neuropathy, and peripheral neuropathy, it is important to recognize the disabilities caused by macrovascular complications of diabetes. These macrovascular complications, which include coronary heart disease, stroke, and peripheral arterial disease, can lead to further impairments (128).

An assessment of disability should be performed to evaluate individuals’ ability to perform ADLs and IADLs, ensuring they can manage basic self-care and more complex tasks necessary for specific living situations. Referrals may be made as necessary to appropriate health care professionals specializing in disability (e.g., physical medicine and rehabilitation physician, physical therapist, occupational therapist, or speech-language pathologist) (127,136,137). Customized rehabilitation interventions for individuals with a disability from diabetes can recover function, allowing for safe physical activity (138), and improve quality of life (139). Additionally, frailty is commonly associated with diabetes, with progression to disability, morbidity, and mortality in older adults. People with diabetes as well as frailty or disability may be sedentary and contend with comorbid conditions such as hypoglycemia, sarcopenia, falls, nutritional deficiencies, obesity, polypharmacy, and cognitive dysfunction. A thorough medical evaluation is imperative to identify the best approaches to preventative and therapeutic interventions for frailty and diabetes management (140).

A psychosocial assessment should be conducted to screen for behavioral health conditions like depression and anxiety and to understand the individual’s social support and coping mechanisms. Functional capacity evaluations, involving tests for physical endurance and strength, are used to gauge the ability of the person with diabetes to work and carry out daily activities. Additionally, standardized disability questionnaires and scales, such as the Diabetes Distress Scale (DDS) and the World Health Organization Disability Assessment Schedule (WHODAS 2.0), are employed to measure the emotional burden of diabetes and overall disability (141,142). These suggested structured assessments are particularly relevant if individuals have fallen, had emergency department visits, missed appointments, made significant errors in the treatment plan, or exhibit apathy and depressed mood.

Moreover, when treating people with an acquired disability from diabetes, it is vital to consider social determinants of health, race and ethnicity, and socioeconomic status (143). Rates of diabetes-related major amputations are higher in individuals who are from racial and ethnic minoritized groups (144), live in rural areas, and are from regions with the

2025  December 10 on guest by http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S61/848865/dc26s004.pdf Downloaded from



---



Comprehensive Medical Evaluation and Assessment of Comorbidities     Diabetes Care Volume 49, Supplement 1, January 2026

lowest socioeconomic levels (145). Addressing the complex challenges faced by individuals with acquired disabilities from diabetes requires a multifaceted approach involving solutions from both within and outside the health care system. By focusing on social determinants of health, health care professionals can develop appropriate interventions, provide advocacy, and establish support systems that cater to the specific needs of this population. See section 1, “Improving Care and Promoting Health in Populations.”

## Hepatitis C

Infection with hepatitis C virus (HCV) is associated with a higher prevalence of type 2 diabetes, which is present in up to one-third of individuals with chronic HCV infection. HCV may impair glucose metabolism by several mechanisms, including directly via viral proteins and indirectly by altering proinflammatory cytokine levels (146). The use of newer direct-acting antiviral drugs produces a sustained virological response (cure) in nearly all cases and has been reported to improve glucose metabolism in individuals with diabetes (147). A meta-analysis of mostly observational studies found a mean reduction in A1C levels of 0.45% (95% CI −0.60 to −0.30) and reduced requirement for glucose-lowering medication use following successful eradication of HCV infection (148).

## Sexual Health in Men

> **Recommendations**  
> **4.18** In men with diabetes or prediabetes, screen for erectile dysfunction (ED), particularly in those with high cardiovascular risk, retinopathy, cardiovascular disease, chronic kidney disease, peripheral or autonomic neuropathy, longer duration of diabetes, depression, and hypogonadism and in those who are not meeting glycemic goals. **B**  
> **4.19** In men with diabetes or prediabetes, inquire about sexual health (e.g., low libido and ED). If symptoms and/or signs of hypogonadism are detected, screen with a morning serum total testosterone level. **B**

The most common sexual dysfunction in men is erectile dysfunction (ED), with an estimated prevalence of 52.5% in men with diabetes (149). The best predictors of ED are age (>40 years), CVD, diabetes, hypertension, obesity, dyslipidemia, metabolic syndrome, hypogonadism, smoking, depression, and use of medications such as antidepressants and opioids (150). Because diabetes, poor nutrition, obesity, lack of exercise, and CVD are often interrelated, it may be challenging to identify the primary risk factor (151), although the most likely primary underlying risk factor is vascular disease (151).

Men with diabetes are at increased risk for both CVD and ED, and ED is a predictor of cardiovascular events in men with diabetes (152,153) as well as in men without diabetes. The significant factors associated with ED in men with diabetes are age, peripheral or autonomic neuropathy, presence of microvascular disease including retinopathy, CVD, duration of diabetes, poor glycemic management, hypogonadism, and diuretic therapy (154). Physical activity may be protective. Men with diabetes and ED report a significant decline in quality-of-life measures and an increase in depressive symptoms (155), and depression is a well-recognized risk factor for ED. Given the bidirectional relationship between ED and depression, treatment of either one can result in improvement in the other condition. CKD is also a risk factor for CVD and ED, with prevalence rates of ED >75% in men on hemodialysis (156).

Awareness and identification of these characteristics, factors, and behaviors can guide clinicians in early screening, treatment, prevention, and counseling in all men with diabetes and particularly those at higher risk for ED (154). Given the evidence that ED is strongly associated with diabetes and CVD, men with ED should be evaluated and managed for cardiovascular and endocrine risk factors. Glycemic assessment in men not previously diagnosed with diabetes, lipid profile, and morning total and free testosterone should be considered mandatory in all men newly presenting with ED (157).

In a recent meta-analysis, testosterone was superior to placebo in improving erectile function in men with testosterone deficiency; however, the magnitude of the effect was lower in the presence of diabetes and obesity (158).

Meta-analyses show that all phosphodiesterase type 5 inhibitors (PDE5Is) are superior to placebo in treating ED, lower dosages had effects comparable with those of higher dosages, and various PDE5Is show comparable efficacy (151). PDE5Is are associated with an increased risk of headaches, flushing, and dyspepsia (151). First-line therapy for ED in men with diabetes is PDE5Is, but men with diabetes may be less responsive than men without diabetes (149). Strategies to improve response to PDE5Is include daily therapy and optimization of comorbidities. In men with diabetes not responding to PDEIs, other potentially effective treatments may include intracavernosal injections, intraurethral prostaglandin, vacuum erection devices, and penile prosthetic surgery (149).

Mean levels of testosterone are lower in men with diabetes than in age-matched men without diabetes, but obesity is a major confounder (159,160). Testosterone replacement in men with symptomatic hypogonadism may have benefits, including improved sexual function, well-being, muscle mass and strength, and bone density (161). In men with diabetes who have symptoms or signs of low testosterone (hypogonadism), a morning total testosterone level should be measured using an accurate and reliable assay (162). In men who have total testosterone levels close to the lower limit, it is reasonable to determine free testosterone concentrations either directly from equilibrium dialysis assays or by calculations that use total testosterone, sex hormone binding globulin, and albumin concentrations (162). Further tests (such as prolactin, luteinizing hormone and follicle-stimulating hormone levels) may be needed to further evaluate the individual. Testosterone replacement in older men with hypogonadism has been associated with increased coronary artery plaque volume, with no conclusive evidence that testosterone supplementation is associated with increased cardiovascular risk in all men with hypogonadism (162,163). Furthermore, ED is also common in people with diabetes (164), and it is reasonable to measure and correct testosterone levels close to the lower limit to address the libido component that contributes to erectile difficulties (151).

## Sexual Health in Women

> **Recommendations**  
> **4.20** In women with diabetes or prediabetes, inquire about sexual health by

2025 December 10 on guest by http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S61/848865/dc26s004.pdf Downloaded from



---



diabetesjournals.org/care     Comprehensive Medical  Evaluation  and  Assessment  of  Comorbidities  S75

screening for desire (libido), arousal, and orgasm difficulties, particularly in those who experience depression and/or anxiety and those with recurrent urinary tract infections. **B**  
**4.21** In postmenopausal women with diabetes or prediabetes, screen for symptoms and/or signs of genitourinary syndrome of menopause, including vaginal dryness and dyspareunia. **B**

Female sexual dysfunction (FSD) is common in women with diabetes. In an epidemiologic cross-sectional study of community-residing middle-aged and older adults (57–85 years), women with diagnosed diabetes were less likely than men with diagnosed diabetes (adjusted OR 0.28 [95% CI 0.16–0.49]) and women without diabetes (0.63 [0.45–0.87]) to be sexually active (165). Older women with diabetes are as likely as men to have sexual problems but are significantly less likely to have discussed sex with a physician (165).

While studies showing the association between diabetes and FSD are less conclusive than those in men, most have reported a higher prevalence of FSD in women with diabetes compared with women without diabetes (166), and a meta-analysis found that FSD is more common in women with type 1 and type 2 diabetes (OR 2.27 and 2.49, respectively) than in women without diabetes (167).

A wide range of prevalence rates of sexual dysfunctions has been reported in women with diabetes. In women with type 1 diabetes, 16–85% (vs. 0–66% in women without diabetes) report problems with desire, 11–76% (vs. 0–41%) report problems with arousal, and 9–66% (vs. 0–39%) report problems with orgasm; 9–57% (vs. 0–28%) report problems with lubrication, and 7–61% (vs. 5–39%) report problems with pain. In women with type 2 diabetes, 70–82% (vs. 10–66% in women without diabetes) report problems with desire, 54–68% (vs. 3–41%) report problems with arousal, and 33–84% (vs. 2–39%) report problems with orgasm; 33–66% (vs. 4–28%) report problems with lubrication, and 33–46% (vs. 8–39%) report problems with pain (168).

Medical comorbidities that are risk factors for FSD include hypertension, obesity, metabolic syndrome, smoking, and hyperlipidemia. Clinical factors for consideration include longer duration of diabetic retinopathy and neuropathy and individuals not meeting glycemic goals. The prevalence of FSD in women with kidney disease is 74% (169).

In women with diabetes, social and psychological components play a major role in FSD. Depression, anxiety, and emotional adjustments to diabetes have been found to be associated with sexual dysfunction in women with diabetes. A study from Norway reported that women with type 1 diabetes with scores on the Female Sexual Function Index (FSFI) (a validated instrument) indicating sexual dysfunction were more likely than women without sexual dysfunction to have diabetes distress, depression, and menopausal symptoms. They were also older and more likely to be single and postmenopausal (170). Another study also showed that women with sexual dysfunction were significantly more likely to report impaired well-being, elevated diabetes distress, poor adjustment to diabetes, and moderate to severe anxiety than women without sexual dysfunction (168).

In a qualitative study exploring the experiences of sexual health and sexual challenges, women with type 1 diabetes reported that diabetes affected their relationship, including sex life, and had an impact on their partner. Challenges included reduced sexual desire, decline in frequency, less spontaneous desire resulting in lack of initiation, and physical challenges such as pain, vaginal dryness, and impaired sensitivity. Several women explained that vaginal dryness was an obstacle during sexual intercourse, leading to pain or even refraining from sexual activity. Sexual challenges were perceived to become a source of disappointment to the partners and consequential guilt for the women. Women also reported fear of hypoglycemia during sex, and some reported trying to maintain mild hyperglycemia. Technology devices, such as glucose monitors and insulin pumps, could be perceived as both a physical and mental obstacle during sexual activity (171).

Many women with diabetes would like their health care professional to initiate a discussion on how diabetes is affecting their sex life (172). Women with type 1 diabetes almost unanimously endorsed that sexual health should be addressed, that they would find it a relief that they were not alone, that they should be provided with information when they are young, and that it would be difficult to address the topic themselves (171). Unfortunately, many health care professionals do not actively discuss sexual functioning in consultations, meaning that when the topic is discussed it is mostly the person with diabetes who initiates the conversation (165). This leads to a marked underdiagnosis and undertreatment of sexual dysfunctions in people with diabetes.

While no specific guidelines are available for the treatment of FSD in this population, women with type 1 or type 2 diabetes should be encouraged to engage in lifestyle interventions and, in the absence of contraindications, may benefit from already-approved treatments for FSD (173). The Look AHEAD (Action for Health in Diabetes) study on intervention demonstrated statistical improvements in the FSFI total score and all domains of sexual dysfunction (174). Lifestyle factors that enhance desire and sexual function include nutrition (such as the Mediterranean eating pattern), exercise (such as walking), and smoking cessation. Other interventions include improving glycemic management and prevention of diabetes complications; diagnosis and treatment of menopausal symptoms with hormonal therapies; addressing vaginal dryness and dyspareunia as well as urinary tract and mycotic genital infections; screening and addressing depression, anxiety, diabetes distress, and related psychosocial issues; and considering FDA-approved centrally acting medications for hypoactive sexual desire disorder, including flibanserin and bremelanotide.

### Metabolic Dysfunction–Associated Steatotic Liver Disease and Metabolic Dysfunction–Associated Steatohepatitis

#### Screening

**Recommendations**  
**4.22a** Screen adults with type 2 diabetes or with prediabetes, particularly those with obesity or other cardiometabolic risk factors or established cardiovascular disease, for their risk of having or developing cirrhosis related to metabolic dysfunction–

2025  December 10 on guest by http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S61/848865/dc26s004.pdf Downloaded from



---



Comprehensive Medical Evaluation and Assessment of Comorbidities     Diabetes Care Volume 49, Supplement 1, January 2026

> associated steatohepatitis (MASH) using a calculated fibrosis-4 index (FIB-4) (derived from age, ALT, AST, and platelets [mdcalc.com/calc/2200/fibrosis4-fib-4-index-liver-fibrosis]), even if they have normal liver enzymes. **B**  
> **4.22b** Adults with diabetes or prediabetes with persistently elevated plasma aminotransferase levels for >6 months and low FIB-4 should be evaluated for other causes of liver disease. **B**  
> **4.23** Adults with type 2 diabetes or prediabetes with a FIB-4 ≥ 1.3 should have additional risk stratification by liver stiffness measurement with transient elastography, or, if unavailable, the enhanced liver fibrosis (ELF) test. **B**  
> **4.24** Refer adults with type 2 diabetes or prediabetes at higher risk for significant liver fibrosis (i.e., as indicated by FIB-4, liver stiffness measurement, or ELF) to a gastroenterologist or hepatologist for further evaluation and management. **B**

Metabolic dysfunction–associated steatotic liver disease (MASLD) has replaced the term nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) to identify steatotic liver disease. The definition includes the presence of steatotic liver disease and at least one cardiometabolic risk factor associated with insulin resistance (e.g., prediabetes, diabetes, atherogenic dyslipidemia, or hypertension) without other identifiable causes of steatosis (175). This is in the absence of ongoing or recent consumption of significant amounts of alcohol (defined as ingestion of >21 standard drinks per week in men and >14 standard drinks per week in women over a 2-year period preceding evaluation) or other secondary causes of hepatic steatosis (176). It is estimated that in adults in the U.S., the prevalence of MASLD is >70% of people with type 2 diabetes (177–179). This is consistent with studies from other countries (180,181). The new definition of MASLD aims to remove potential stigma from the term “fatty” when referring to steatosis, highlights the role of prediabetes and type 2 diabetes in MASLD, and provides a positive diagnosis by using cardiometabolic risk factors as surrogates for insulin resistance, the main driver for the development of steatosis. The new definition correlates well with the past definition of MASLD for people with prediabetes or type 2 diabetes (who already have, by definition, one cardiometabolic risk factor). A separate category outside of MASLD, named metabolic dysfunction and alcoholic liver disease, was created for circumstances in which alcohol intake is greater than that allowed for MASLD but less than that attributed to alcoholic liver disease. More research is needed to better characterize the predictive value for metabolic dysfunction–associated steatohepatitis (MASH) of different cardiometabolic risk factors and the natural history of metabolic dysfunction and alcoholic liver disease or steatosis in young adults without cardiometabolic risk factors.

Diabetes is a major risk factor for developing MASH (formerly nonalcoholic steatohepatitis, or NASH) and worse liver outcomes (180,181). MASH is defined histologically as having ≥5% hepatic steatosis with inflammation and hepatocyte injury (hepatocyte ballooning), with or without evidence of liver fibrosis (176). Steatohepatitis is estimated to affect more than half of people with type 2 diabetes with MASLD (182,183). Fibrosis stages are classified histologically as the following: F0, no fibrosis; F1, mild; F2, moderate (significant); F3, severe (advanced); and F4, cirrhosis. In the U.S., between 12 and 20% of people with type 2 diabetes have “at-risk” MASH (i.e., steatohepatitis with clinically significant fibrosis [≥F2] and at risk for cirrhosis) (177,178,182). A similar or higher prevalence has been observed worldwide (180,181,183). People with type 2 diabetes and at-risk MASH are at an increased risk of future cirrhosis, hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) (184,185), and liver transplantation (186). The prevalence of MASLD in people with type 1 diabetes is ~20% and is driven by obesity, which is becoming more common in this population (187), with a large variability across studies using different steatosis measurement methods (188). The prevalence of liver steatosis in a population with type 1 diabetes by MRI (i.e., the gold standard) with low prevalence of obesity was only 8.8% compared with 68% in people with type 2 diabetes (189). The prevalence of clinically significant fibrosis (≥F2) is estimated to be ~5% (190), which is much lower than the prevalence in type 2 diabetes (177,178,182). Therefore, screening for fibrosis in people with type 1 diabetes should only be considered in the presence of additional risk factors for MASLD, such as obesity, incidental hepatic steatosis on imaging, or elevated plasma aminotransferases.

Clinicians underestimate the prevalence of at-risk MASH and do not consistently implement appropriate screening strategies in people with prediabetes or type 2 diabetes, thus missing a chance to establish an early diagnosis. This pattern of underdiagnosis is compounded by sparse referral to specialists and inadequate prescription of medications with potential efficacy in MASH (191,192). The goal of screening for MASLD is to identify people with at-risk MASH to prevent future cirrhosis, HCC, liver transplantation, and all-cause mortality (193–196). This risk is higher in people who have central obesity and cardiometabolic risk factors or insulin resistance, are >50 years of age, and/or have persistently elevated plasma aminotransferases (AST and/or ALT >30 units/L for >6 months) (178,197). Some genetic variants that alter hepatocyte triglyceride metabolism may also increase the risk of MASH progression and cirrhosis (198,199), amplifying the impact of obesity, but the role of genetic testing in clinical practice remains to be established. Individuals with MASLD also are at a greater risk of developing extrahepatic cancer (185), type 2 diabetes (194), and CVD (200,201). Emerging evidence suggests that MASLD increases the risk of CKD in people with type 2 diabetes, particularly when liver fibrosis is present (202,203), although the association of MASLD with diabetic retinopathy is less clear (204).

The fibrosis-4 index (FIB-4) is the most cost-effective strategy for the initial screening of people with prediabetes and cardiometabolic risk factors or with type 2 diabetes for at-risk MASH in primary care and diabetes clinical settings (181,192,197,205–208). The diagnostic algorithm for the screening and liver fibrosis risk stratification of people with prediabetes or type 2 diabetes is shown in **Fig. 4.2**. A screening strategy relying on elevated plasma aminotransferases >40 units/L would miss most individuals with MASH in these settings, as at-risk MASH with clinically significant fibrosis (≥F2) is frequently observed with plasma aminotransferases below the commonly used cutoff of 40 units/L (177–179,182,209,210). The American College of Gastroenterology considers



---



diabetesjournals.org/care    Comprehensive Medical Evaluation and Assessment of Comorbidities  S77

the upper limit of normal ALT levels to be 29–33 units/L for male individuals and 19–25 units/L for female individuals (211), as higher levels are associated with increased liver-related mortality. The FIB-4 estimates the risk of hepatic cirrhosis and is calculated from the computation of age, plasma aminotransferases (AST and ALT), and platelet count (mdcalc.com/calc/2200/fibrosis-4-fib-4-index-liver-fibrosis). A value of <1.3 is considered low risk of having advanced fibrosis (F3–F4) and for developing adverse liver outcomes, while ≥1.3 is considered as having a higher probability of at-risk MASH clinically significant fibrosis (≥F2) and increased risk of adverse liver outcomes. A value of >2.67 confers a high risk of having advanced fibrosis (F3–F4), and referral to the liver specialist is warranted without additional testing. FIB-4 predicts changes over time in hepatic fibrosis (212,213) and allows risk stratification of individuals in terms of future liver-related morbidity and mortality (214). FIB-4 has reasonable sensitivity but low specificity; hence, a negative result may rule out fibrosis while a positive result requires confirmatory testing (213,215,216). Therefore, a FIB-4 score <1.3 should be taken as a general guidance of having a lower risk of MASH with advanced fibrosis but does not replace clinical judgement. Its low cost, simplicity, and good specificity make it the initial test of choice (Fig. 4.2). FIB-4 has not been validated in pediatric populations or in adults aged <35 years. In individuals with diabetes ≥65 years of age, higher cutoffs for FIB-4 have been recommended (1.9–2.0 rather than ≥1.3) (217). In some individuals with at-risk MASH, FIB-4 score may be <1.3, especially in those with obesity and type 2 diabetes. Additional testing may be required if the FIB-4 score is between 1.0 and 1.3 in individuals with type 2 diabetes with multiple cardiometabolic risk factors.

In individuals with a FIB-4 ≥1.3, there is need for additional risk stratification with a liver stiffness measurement (LSM) by transient elastography (Fig. 4.2). Use of a second nonproprietary diagnostic panel is not recommended (e.g., MASLD fibrosis score and others), as they generally do not perform better than FIB-4 (176,179,215). Transient elastography (LSM) is the best-validated imaging technique for fibrosis risk stratification, and it predicts future cirrhosis and all-cause mortality in MASLD (176,197,205,206,218). An LSM value of <8.0 kPa has a good negative predictive value to exclude advanced fibrosis (≥F3–F4) (219–221) and indicates lower risk for clinically significant fibrosis. Such individuals with prediabetes or type 2 diabetes can be followed in nonspecialty clinics with repeat surveillance testing every ≥2 years, although the precise time interval remains to be established. If the LSM is ≥8.0 kPa, the risk for advanced fibrosis (≥F3-F4) is higher and such individuals should be referred to the hepatologist (176,182,197,205) within the framework of an interprofessional team (222–224). FIB-4 followed by LSM helps stratify individuals with diabetes by risk level and minimize specialty referrals (218,225–228) (Fig. 4.2). Given the lack of widespread availability of LSM, the ELF test is a good alternative (229). Individuals with ELF <9.8 are considered at low risk for adverse liver outcomes. Individuals with ELF ≥9.8 are considered at high risk of having MASH with advanced liver fibrosis (≥F3–F4) and therefore are at risk for adverse liver outcomes (176,206,208).

<table>
<thead>
<tr>
<th colspan="3">Diagnostic algorithm for the prevention of cirrhosis in people with metabolic dysfunction–associated steatotic liver disease (MASLD)</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td rowspan="3">Groups with the highest risk of cirrhosis</td>
<td>Type 2 diabetes</td>
<td rowspan="3" style="text-align:center;">Rule out secondary causes of steatosis or ↑ ALT</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Prediabetes</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Obesity with ≥1 CV factors</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:center; font-weight:bold; color:#b22222;">Is FIB-4 ≥1.3?</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:center;">No</td>
<td>Lower risk of cirrhosis</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:center;">Yes</td>
<td>Higher risk of cirrhosis</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:center;">Is LSM ≥8.0 kPa*?</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:center;">No</td>
<td>
<b>Managed by primary care (and interprofessional team)</b>
<ul>
<li>Repeat FIB-4 every 1–2 years</li>
<li>Optimize lifestyle and treatment of comorbidities</li>
</ul>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="2" style="text-align:center;">Yes</td>
<td>
<b>Managed by liver specialist (and interprofessional team)</b>
<ul>
<li>Additional imaging and biomarker risk stratification</li>
<li>Treatment + long-term follow-up</li>
</ul>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="3" style="font-size:smaller;">
*Consider ELF if LSM not available. Refer to liver specialist if ELF ≥9.8
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

> **Figure 4.2** — Diagnostic algorithm for risk stratification and the prevention of cirrhosis in individuals with metabolic dysfunction-associated steatotic liver disease (MASLD). CV, cardiovascular; ELF, enhanced liver fibrosis test; FIB-4, fibrosis-4 index; LSM, liver stiffness measurement, as measured by vibration-controlled transient elastography. *In the absence of LSM, consider ELF a diagnostic alternative. If ELF ≥9.8, an individual is at high risk of metabolic dysfunction-associated steatohepatitis with advanced liver fibrosis (≥F3–F4) and should be referred to a liver specialist.

2025 December 10 on guest by http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S61/848865/dc26s004.pdf Downloaded from



---



Comprehensive Medical Evaluation and Assessment of Comorbidities     Diabetes Care Volume 49, Supplement 1, January 2026

They should be referred to a gastroenterologist or hepatologist. The optimal cutoff for clinical use of ELF in primary care and endocrinology settings is evolving (230–233). An ELF <9.8 suggests an individual is at low risk of advanced liver fibrosis and may be followed in the nonspecialty clinic with repeat testing in ≥2 years but may need repeat testing more often if ELF is between 9.2 and 9.7.

Specialists may order additional tests for fibrosis risk stratification in MASH (175,197,205,208), including magnetic resonance elastography (MRE) (best overall performance, particularly for early fibrosis stages) or multiparametric iron-corrected T1 MRI (cT1) (234) and patented blood-based fibrosis biomarkers. While liver biopsy remains the gold standard for the diagnosis of MASH, its indication is reserved to the discretion of the specialist within an interprofessional team approach due to high costs and potential for morbidity associated with this procedure.

## Management

> **Recommendations**  
> **4.25** Adults with type 2 diabetes or prediabetes, particularly with overweight or obesity, who have metabolic dysfunction–associated steatotic liver disease (MASLD) should be recommended lifestyle changes using an interprofessional approach that promotes weight loss, ideally within a structured nutrition plan and physical activity program for cardiometabolic benefits **B** and histological improvement. **C**  
> **4.26** In adults with type 2 diabetes, MASLD, and overweight or obesity, consider using a glucagon-like peptide 1 receptor agonist (GLP-1 RA) with demonstrated benefits in MASH **A** or a dual glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide (GIP) and GLP-1 RA with potential benefits in MASH **B** for the treatment of obesity as an adjunctive therapy to lifestyle interventions for weight loss.  
> **4.27a** In adults with type 2 diabetes and biopsy-proven MASH or those at high risk for liver fibrosis (based on noninvasive tests), a GLP-1 RA is preferred for glycemic management due to beneficial effects on MASH. **A** Pioglitazone **B** or a dual GIP and GLP-1 RA **B** can be considered for glycemic management due to potential beneficial effects on MASH.  
> **4.27b** Combination therapy with pioglitazone plus GLP-1 RA can be considered for the treatment of hyperglycemia in adults with type 2 diabetes with biopsy-proven MASH or those at high risk of liver fibrosis (identified with noninvasive tests) because of potential beneficial effects on MASH. **B**  
> **4.28** For consideration of treatment with a thyroid hormone receptor-β agonist in adults with type 2 diabetes or prediabetes with MASLD with moderate (F2) or advanced (F3) liver fibrosis on liver histology, or by a validated imaging-based or blood-based test, refer to a gastroenterologist or hepatologist with expertise in MASLD management. **A**  
> **4.29** Treatment initiation and monitoring should be individualized and within the context of an interprofessional team that includes a gastroenterologist or hepatologist, consideration of individual preferences, and a careful shared-decision cost-benefit discussion. **B**  
> **4.30a** In adults with type 2 diabetes and MASLD, use of glucose-lowering therapies other than pioglitazone or GLP-1 RAs may be continued as clinically indicated, but these therapies lack evidence of benefit in MASH. **B**  
> **4.30b** Insulin therapy is the preferred agent for the treatment of hyperglycemia in adults with type 2 diabetes with decompensated cirrhosis. **C**  
> **4.31a** Adults with type 2 diabetes and MASLD are at increased cardiovascular risk; therefore, comprehensive management of cardiovascular risk factors is recommended. **B**  
> **4.31b** Statin therapy is safe in adults with type 2 diabetes and compensated cirrhosis from MASLD and should be initiated or continued for cardiovascular risk reduction as clinically indicated. **B** In people with decompensated cirrhosis, statin therapy should be used with caution, and close monitoring is needed, given limited safety and efficacy data. **B**  
> **4.32a** Consider metabolic surgery in appropriate candidates as an option to treat MASH in adults with type 2 diabetes and obesity **B** and to improve cardiovascular outcomes. **B**  
> **4.32b** Metabolic surgery should be used with caution in adults with type 2 diabetes with compensated cirrhosis from MASLD **B** and is not recommended in decompensated cirrhosis. **B**

While steatohepatitis and cirrhosis occur in lean people with diabetes and are believed to be linked to genetic predisposition, insulin resistance, and environmental factors (235,236), ample evidence implicates excess visceral fat and overall adiposity in individuals with overweight and obesity in the pathogenesis of the disease (236,237). Obesity in the setting of type 2 diabetes worsens insulin resistance and steatohepatitis, promoting the development of cirrhosis (238). Therefore, clinicians should enact evidence-based interventions (as discussed in section 5, “Facilitating Positive Health Behaviors and Well-being to Improve Health Outcomes”) to promote healthy lifestyle change and weight loss for individuals with overweight or obesity and MASLD. There is consensus that a minimum weight loss goal of 5%, preferably ≥10%, is needed to improve liver histology (176,197,205,208), with fibrosis requiring the larger weight reduction to promote change (239,240). However, there is significant individual variability in histological outcomes with weight loss. Individualized, structured weight loss and exercise programs offer greater benefit than standard counseling in people with MASLD (241).

Nutrition plan recommendations to induce an energy deficit are not different from those for individuals with diabetes with obesity without MASLD and should include a reduction of macronutrient content, limiting saturated fat, refined carbohydrates, and added sugar, with adoption of healthier eating patterns. The Mediterranean eating pattern has the best evidence for improving liver and cardiometabolic health (205–208,241,242). Both aerobic and resistance training improve MASLD in proportion to treatment engagement and intensity of the program (243). Obesity pharmacotherapy may assist with weight loss in the context of lifestyle modification if not achieved by lifestyle modification alone (see section 8,

2025 December 10 on guest by http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S61/848865/dc26s004.pdf Downloaded from



---


diabetesjournals.org/care    Comprehensive Medical  Evaluation  and  Assessment  of  Comorbidities  S79

“Obesity and Weight Management for the Prevention and Treatment of Diabetes”).

Given the high prevalence of at-risk MASH (∼12–20%) (178,179,181,182), higher risk of disease progression and liver-related mortality (180,196,244), and the lack of pharmacological treatments once cirrhosis is established (245,246), optimizing the pharmacological management of hyperglycemia and obesity in individuals with type 2 diabetes and MASH could serve the dual purpose of addressing these comorbidities while treating the liver disease (Fig. 4.3). Therefore, early diagnosis and treatment of MASLD offers the best opportunity for cirrhosis prevention. In phase 2 clinical trials, pioglitazone and some GLP-1 RAs have been shown to be potentially effective to treat steatohepatitis (205,247–250) and to slow fibrosis progression (251,252). They may also decrease CVD (248), which is the number one cause of death in individuals with type 2 diabetes and MASLD (200).

Recently, a phase 3 clinical trial examined the effect of semaglutide in subjects with MASH without cirrhosis (ESSENCE) (253). The trial reported that in 36.8% of individuals treated for 72 weeks with semaglutide 2.4 mg subcutaneously once weekly, improvement in liver fibrosis was achieved with no worsening of steatohepatitis, compared with 22.4% on placebo (P < 0.001), while 62.9% achieved resolution of steatohepatitis with no worsening of liver fibrosis, compared with 34.3% on placebo (P < 0.001). Based on the phase 3 trial results, the FDA recently approved semaglutide for the treatment of MASH with moderate to advanced liver fibrosis (254).

Semaglutide is currently the only glucose-lowering or obesity medication that is FDA approved for the treatment of MASH. The recommendation to treat hyperglycemia with other GLP-1 RA–based therapies and/or pioglitazone in individuals with type 2 diabetes and MASLD is based on consistent histological benefit for steatohepatitis in several phase 2 randomized controlled trials (RCTs) with GLP-1 RAs (254–259) and with pioglitazone (255,256) compared with no benefit with metformin or other glucose-lowering medications in MASH (176,197,205).

Pioglitazone improves glucose and lipid metabolism and reverses steatohepatitis in individuals with prediabetes or type 2 diabetes (252,255,257) and even in individuals without diabetes (256,258,259) (Fig. 4.3). Fibrosis also improved in some trials (247,259). A meta-analysis (251) concluded that pioglitazone treatment results in resolution of MASH and may improve fibrosis. Furthermore, combination therapy with pioglitazone plus a GLP-1 RA has been reported safe and effective for the treatment of hyperglycemia in adults with type 2 diabetes (260–263) as well as in reducing hepatic steatosis (260,262), suggesting additive benefit in individuals with MASLD. It is important

Metabolic dysfunction–associated steatotic liver disease (MASLD) treatment algorithm

<table>
<thead>
<tr>
<th colspan="2"></th>
<th>Obesity<br>pharmacotherapy</th>
<th>Diabetes<br>pharmacotherapy</th>
<th>MASH<br>pharmacotherapy</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td rowspan="4" style="vertical-align:middle; text-align:center; font-weight:bold; border:none;">Individualize care,<br>targeting the<br>following:</td>
<td style="vertical-align:top; border:none;">
<ul>
<li>Adoption of a healthy lifestyle</li>
<li>Weight loss (if indicated)</li>
<li>Optimal diabetes management</li>
<li>Cardiovascular risk reduction</li>
<li>Need for metabolic surgery (as recommended by guidelines)</li>
</ul>
</td>
<td colspan="3" style="border:none;"></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="font-weight:bold;">MASLD with F0-F1</td>
<td>Prefer GLP-1 RA, dual GIP and GLP-1 RA</td>
<td>Prefer GLP-1 RA, dual GIP and GLP-1 RA, pioglitazone, SGLT2i</td>
<td>Not indicated</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="font-weight:bold;">MASLD with F2-F3<br>(“at risk” MASH)</td>
<td>Prefer GLP-1 RA, dual GIP and GLP-1 RA</td>
<td>Prefer GLP-1 RA, dual GIP and GLP-1 RA, pioglitazone</td>
<td>Resmetirom, GLP-1 RA†</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="font-weight:bold;">Compensated cirrhosis</td>
<td>As with F2-F3 with caution*</td>
<td>As with F2-F3 with caution*</td>
<td><b>❗ AVOID</b></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="font-weight:bold;">Decompensated cirrhosis</td>
<td><b>❗ AVOID</b></td>
<td>Only use insulin</td>
<td><b>❗ AVOID</b></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

† Only semaglutide among GLP-1 RAs has been approved by the FDA for treatment of MASH.  
* Individualized care and close monitoring needed in compensated cirrhosis given limited safety data available.

> Figure 4.3—Metabolic dysfunction-associated steatotic liver disease (MASLD) treatment algorithm. F0-F1, no to minimal fibrosis; F2-F3, moderate fibrosis; F4, cirrhosis; GIP, glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide; GLP-1 RA, glucagon-like peptide 1 receptor agonist; MASH, metabolic dysfunction-associated steatohepatitis; SGLT2i, sodium–glucose cotransporter 2 inhibitor.

2025  December 10 on guest by http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S61/848865/dc26s004.pdf from Downloaded


---



Comprehensive Medical Evaluation and Assessment of Comorbidities  
Diabetes Care Volume 49, Supplement 1, January 2026

to note that these studies are based on phase 2 clinical trials and await further phase 3 evidence. However, these plans are attractive because they offer potential benefit compared with lack of histological benefit (or clinical trial data) from other oral glucose-lowering therapies in MASLD. In the context of treating hyperglycemia in individuals with type 2 diabetes with MASLD, where the low cost of pioglitazone and any liver improvement would be an added benefit to glycemic management, these plans would be potentially cost-effective for the treatment of MASLD (264,265). Vitamin E may be beneficial for the treatment of MASH in individuals without diabetes (258). However, in individuals with type 2 diabetes, vitamin E monotherapy was found to be ineffective in a small RCT (252), and it did not seem to enhance pioglitazone’s efficacy when used in combination, as reported in an earlier trial in this population (257). Pioglitazone causes dose-dependent weight gain (15 mg/day, mean weight gain of 1–2%; 45 mg/day, mean weight gain of 3–5%), which can be blunted or reversed if combined with SGLT2 inhibitors or GLP-1 RAs (248,262,263,266). Pioglitazone increases fracture risk, may promote heart failure if used in individuals with preexisting congestive heart failure, and may increase the risk of bladder cancer, although this remains controversial (176,197,205,248,249).

GLP-1 RAs are effective at inducing weight loss and ameliorating elevated plasma aminotransferases and steatosis (247) (Fig. 4.3). As discussed above, semaglutide was effective as a treatment for MASH with moderate to advanced liver fibrosis in a phase 3 RCT (253). However, there are few phase 2 RCTs of other GLP-1 RAs in individuals with MASH proven by biopsy. A small RCT reported that liraglutide improved some features of MASH and may delay fibrosis progression (267). Tirzepatide is a dual GIP and GLP-1 RA known to reduce liver steatosis in MASLD (268), and a phase 2 paired-biopsy study of 190 adults with overweight or obesity with MASH (50–60% of whom had type 2 diabetes) recently reported that doses of 5, 10, and 15 mg/day resulted in resolution of steatohepatitis without worsening of fibrosis in 44%, 56%, and 62% of participants, respectively, compared with 10% of participants receiving placebo (P < 0.001 for all three comparisons) (269). Improvement of at least one fibrosis stage without worsening of MASH occurred in 55%, 51%, and 51% of participants, respectively, compared with 30% of participants receiving placebo. Survodutide is a dual GLP-1 and glucagon receptor agonist that is in development, and a phase 2 paired-biopsy trial recently reported benefit in MASH (270). In summary, other GLP-1–based therapies (besides semaglutide) and/or pioglitazone are recommended to treat type 2 diabetes in adults with MASH based on histological benefit for steatohepatitis in several phase 2 RCTs (269,270) compared with no benefit with metformin or other glucose-lowering or obesity medications. Within the context of their approved indication (e.g., obesity or type 2 diabetes), these medications are cost-effective to treat the comorbidity, while potentially improving MASH, which becomes an added benefit.

SGLT2 inhibitors (271–273) and insulin (249) reduce hepatic steatosis, but their effects on steatohepatitis remain unknown. The use of glucose-lowering agents other than pioglitazone or GLP-1 RAs may be continued in individuals with type 2 diabetes and MASLD for glycemic management, as clinically indicated. However, these agents have either failed to improve steatohepatitis in paired-biopsy studies (metformin) or have no RCTs with liver histological end points (i.e., sulfonylureas, glitinides, dipeptidyl peptidase 4 inhibitors, or acarbose).

Resmetirom is a thyroid hormone receptor-β agonist approved by the FDA for the treatment of adults with MASLD with moderate (F2) or advanced (F3) liver fibrosis on liver histology or a validated imaging- or blood-based test. In a phase 3 RCT, resmetirom for 52 weeks in 966 adults at the highest dose of 100 mg (or placebo) met the primary end point of MASH resolution without worsening of fibrosis in 29.9% of individuals compared with 9.7% on placebo (P < 0.001) (274). Fibrosis improved in up to 25.9% and 14.2%, respectively (P < 0.001). Nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea occurred more often with resmetirom. The gastrointestinal side effects are dose dependent and improve with continued treatment. Resmetirom decreased free thyroxine (T4) levels by ~20% and increased sex hormone-binding protein levels two- to threefold. Although a recent review of the data concluded that there is little concern about these changes, long-term postmarketing data must be collected (275). Guidance by the American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases (AASLD) about optimal individual identification for treatment, safety, and long-term monitoring has recently been published (276). This is especially relevant because hypothyroidism and hypogonadism are more prevalent in people with MASLD than in the general population (176,205), and clinicians should monitor all individuals with MASLD for symptoms of endocrine deficiency and manage according to clinical practice guidelines. Per its label, candidates for resmetirom treatment are those with MASLD and moderate (F2) to advanced (F3) liver fibrosis but not with cirrhosis or other active liver disease (i.e., alcohol-related liver disease, autoimmune hepatitis, or primary biliary cholangitis) or inadequately managed hypothyroidism or hyperthyroidism. Given complexities associated with selection of an individual for therapy, drug cost, and treatment monitoring, therapy should be individualized and initiated by a hepatologist or gastroenterologist with expertise in MASH within an interprofessional team.

Insulin is the preferred glucose-lowering agent for the treatment of hyperglycemia in adults with type 2 diabetes with decompensated cirrhosis given the lack of robust evidence about the safety and efficacy of oral agents and noninsulin injectables (i.e., GLP-1 RAs and dual GIP and GLP-1 RAs) (246), although a recent 48-week study suggested that GLP-1 RAs are safe in individuals with MASH and compensated cirrhosis (277).

Metabolic surgery leading to sustained weight loss and improvement of type 2 diabetes can improve MASH and cardiometabolic health, altering the natural history of the disease (278). Meta-analyses report that 70–80% of people have improvement in hepatic steatosis, 50–75% of people have improvement in inflammation and hepatocyte ballooning (necrosis), and 30–40% of people have improvement in fibrosis (279,280). It may also reduce the risk of HCC (280). It is important to note that currently metabolic surgery is not indicated solely for treatment of MASH. Given that many individuals with MASH have metabolic risks (type 2 diabetes and obesity) that are indications for metabolic surgery, the improvement in liver health is expected, but surgical indication should follow current practice guidelines. Metabolic surgery should be used with caution in individuals with compensated cirrhosis (i.e., asymptomatic stage of

2025 December 10 on guest by http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S61/848865/dc26s004.pdf Downloaded from



---



diabetesjournals.org/care     Comprehensive Medical  Evaluation  and  Assessment  of  Comorbidities  S81

cirrhosis without associated liver compli-  
cations), but with experienced surgeons  
the risk of hepatic decompensation is  
similar to that for individuals with less  
advanced liver disease. Because of the  
paucity of safety and outcome data,  
metabolic surgery is not recommended  
in individuals with decompensated cirrho-  
sis (i.e., cirrhosis stage with complications  
such as variceal hemorrhage, ascites, he-  
patic encephalopathy, or jaundice) who  
also have a much higher risk of postopera-  
tive development of these liver-related  
complications (176,197,205).  
Adults with type 2 diabetes and MASLD  
are at an increased risk of CVD and re-  
quire comprehensive management of  
cardiovascular risk factors (176,197,205).  
Within an interprofessional approach, statin  
therapy should be initiated or continued  
for cardiovascular risk reduction as clinically  
indicated. Overall, its use appears to be  
safe in adults with type 2 diabetes and  
MASH, including in the presence of com-  
pensated cirrhosis (Child-Pugh class A or B  
cirrhosis) from MASLD. Some studies even  
suggest that statin use in individuals with  
chronic liver disease may reduce episodes  
of hepatic decompensation and/or overall  
mortality (281,282). Statin therapy is not  
recommended in decompensated cirrhosis  
given limited safety and efficacy data  
(176,197,206).

## Obstructive Sleep Apnea  
Age-adjusted rates of obstructive sleep  
apnea, a risk factor for CVD, are signifi-  
cantly higher (4- to 10-fold) with obe-  
sity, especially with central obesity (283)  
(see section 5, “Facilitating Positive Health  
Behaviors and Well-being to Improve  
Health Outcomes”). The prevalence of ob-  
structive sleep apnea in the population  
with type 2 diabetes may be as high as  
23%, and the prevalence of any sleep-di-  
sordered breathing may be as high as 58%  
(284,285). In participants with obesity and  
type 2 diabetes enrolled in the Look  
AHEAD trial, the prevalence exceeded  
80% (286). Obstructive sleep apnea should  
be evaluated in individuals with suggestive  
symptoms (e.g., excessive daytime sleepi-  
ness, snoring, and witnessed apnea) (287).  
Sleep apnea treatment (lifestyle modifica-  
tion, continuous positive airway pressure,  
oral appliances, and surgery) significantly  
improves quality of life and blood pressure  
management. Recently, two phase 3 ran-  
domized trials found that among adults  
with obesity and moderate-to-severe ob-  
structive sleep apnea but without diabe-  
tes, treatment with the dual GIP and  
GLP-1 RA tirzepatide substantially reduced  
sleep apnea severity (288). More research  
is needed to determine the effects of  
GLP-1 and dual GIP and GLP-1 RAs on sleep  
apnea in individuals with diabetes.

## Pancreatitis  
Diabetes is linked to diseases of the  
exocrine pancreas, such as pancreatitis,  
which may disrupt the global architecture  
or physiology of the pancreas, often re-  
sulting in both exocrine and endocrine  
dysfunction. Up to half of individuals with  
diabetes may have some degree of im-  
paired exocrine pancreas function (289).  
People with diabetes are at an approxi-  
mately twofold higher risk of developing  
acute pancreatitis (290).  
Conversely, prediabetes and/or diabe-  
tes has been found to develop in approx-  
imately one-third of individuals after an  
episode of acute pancreatitis (291); thus,  
the relationship is likely bidirectional. Post-  
pancreatitis diabetes may include either  
new-onset disease or previously unrecog-  
nized diabetes (292). Studies of individuals  
treated with incretin-based therapies for  
diabetes have also reported that pancre-  
atitis may occur more frequently with  
these medications, but results have been  
mixed and causality has not been estab-  
lished (293,294).  
Islet autotransplantation should be  
considered for individuals requiring total  
pancreatectomy for medically refractory  
chronic pancreatitis to prevent postsur-  
gical diabetes. Approximately one-third  
of individuals undergoing total pancrea-  
tectomy with islet autotransplantation  
are insulin free 1 year postoperatively,  
and observational studies from different  
centers have demonstrated islet graft  
function up to a decade after the sur-  
gery in some individuals (294–298). Both  
personal factors for the individual with  
diabetes and disease factors should be  
carefully considered when deciding the  
indications and timing of this surgery.  
Surgeries should be performed in skilled  
facilities that have demonstrated exper-  
tise in islet autotransplantation.

## Sensory Impairment  
Hearing impairment, both in high-frequency  
and low- to midfrequency ranges, is more  
common in people with diabetes than in  
those without, with stronger associations  
found in studies of younger people (299).  
Proposed pathophysiologic mechanisms  
include the combined contributions of hy-  
perglycemia and oxidative stress with co-  
chlear microangiopathy and auditory  
neuropathy (300). In a National Health and  
Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES)  
analysis, hearing impairment was about  
twice as prevalent in individuals with dia-  
betes as in those without, after adjusting  
for age and other risk factors for hearing  
impairment (301). Low HDL cholesterol,  
coronary heart disease, peripheral neu-  
ropathy, and general poor health have  
been reported as risk factors for hearing  
impairment for individuals with diabetes,  
but an association of hearing loss with gly-  
cemia has not been consistently observed  
(302). In the DCCT/EDIC cohort, increases  
in the time-weighted mean A1C was asso-  
ciated with increased risk of hearing im-  
pairment when tested after long-term  
(>20 years) follow-up, with every 10%  
increase in A1C leading to 19% high-  
frequency impairment (303). Impairment  
in smell, but not taste, has also been re-  
ported in individuals with diabetes (304).

## References  
1. Goh LH, Siah CJR, Tam WWS, Tai ES, Young DYL. Effectiveness of the chronic care model for adults with type 2 diabetes in primary care: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Syst Rev 2022;11:273  
2. Rodriguez K, Ryan D, Dickinson JK, Phan V. Improving quality outcomes: the value of diabetes care and education specialists. Clin Diabetes 2022;40:356–365  
3. Dickinson JK, Guzman SJ, Maryniuk MD, et al. The use of language in diabetes care and education. Diabetes Care 2017;40:1790–1799  
4. Ji M, Sereika SM, Dunbar-Jacob J, Erlen JA. Correlation of symptom distress, self-efficacy, and social support with problem-solving and glycemic control among patients with type 2 diabetes. Sci Diabetes Self Manag Care 2021;47:85–93  
5. Beverly EA, Hughes AS, Saunders A. Examination of health care providers’ use of language in diabetes care: a secondary qualitative data analysis. Clin Diabetes 2022;40:434–441  
6. Issa AN, Wodi AP, Moser CA, Cineas S. Advisory committee on immunization practices recommended immunization schedule for children and adolescents aged 18 years or younger - United States, 2025. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2025;74:26–29  
7. Wodi AP, Issa AN, Moser CA, Cineas S. Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices Recommended Immunization Schedule for Adults Aged 19 Years or Older - United States, 2025. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2025;74:30–33  
8. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Advisory Committee on Immunization Practice (ACIP). ACIP Evidence to Recommendation User’s

2025  December  
10 on  guest  
by http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S61/848865/dc26s004.pdf  
from Downloaded  



---



S82   Comprehensive Medical  Evaluation  and  Assessment  of  Comorbidities     Diabetes Care Volume  49,  Supplement  1,  January  2026

Guide, 2020. Accessed 25 August 2025. Available from https://stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/127248  
9. Goeijenbier M, van Sloten TT, Slobbe L, et al. Benefits of flu vaccination for persons with diabetes mellitus: a review. Vaccine 2017;35:5095–5101  
10. Behrouzi B, Bhatt DL, Cannon CP, et al. Association of influenza vaccination with cardiovascular risk: a meta-analysis. JAMA Netw Open 2022;5:e228873  
11. Kornum JB, Thomsen RW, Riis A, Lervang H-H, Schønheyder HC, Sørensen HT. Diabetes, glycemic control, and risk of hospitalization with pneumonia: a population-based case-control study. Diabetes Care 2008;31:1541–1545  
12. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Expanded Recommendations for Use of Pneumococcal Conjugate Vaccines Among Adults Aged ≥50 Years: recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices — United States, 2024. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report (MMWR) 2025;74:1–8  
13. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices Recommended Immunization Schedule for Adults Aged 19 Years or Older — United States, 2025. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2025;74:30–33  
14. Britton A, Roper LE, Kotton CN, et al. Use of respiratory syncytial virus vaccines in adults aged ≥60 years: updated recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices - United States, 2024. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2024;73:696–702  
15. Tinetti ME, Fried TR, Boyd CM. Designing health care for the most common chronic condition–multimorbidity. JAMA 2012;307:2493–2494  
16. Sudore RL, Karter AJ, Huang ES, et al. Symptom burden of adults with type 2 diabetes across the disease course: diabetes & aging study. J Gen Intern Med 2012;27:1674–1681  
17. Nederstigt C, Uitbeijerse BS, Janssen LGM, Corssmit EPM, de Koning EJP, Dekkers OM. Associated auto-immune disease in type 1 diabetes patients: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Eur J Endocrinol 2019;180:135–144  
18. Hughes JW, Riddlesworth TD, DiMeglio LA, Miller KM, Rickels MR, McGill JB; T1D Exchange Clinic Network. Autoimmune diseases in children and adults with type 1 diabetes from the T1D Exchange Clinic Registry. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2016;101:4931–4937  
19. Kahaly GJ, Hansen MP. Type 1 diabetes associated autoimmunity. Autoimmun Rev 2016;15:644–648  
20. Eisenbarth GS, Gottlieb PA. Autoimmune polyendocrine syndromes. N Engl J Med 2004;350:2068–2079  
21. Pham-Short A, Donaghue KC, Ambler G, Phelan H, Twigg S, Craig ME. Screening for celiac disease in type 1 diabetes: a systematic review. Pediatrics 2015;136:e170–e176  
22. Cauley JA, Hochberg MC, Lui L-Y, et al. Long-term risk of incident vertebral fractures. JAMA 2007;298:2761–2767  
23. Kanis JA, Johnell O, De Laet C, et al. A meta-analysis of previous fracture and subsequent fracture risk. Bone 2004;35:375–382  
24. Pedersen AB, Ehrenstein V, Szépligeti SK, et al. Thirty-five-year trends in first-time hospitalization for hip fracture, 1-year mortality, and the prognostic impact of comorbidity: a Danish Nationwide Cohort Study, 1980–2014. Epidemiology 2017;28:898–905  
25. Tajeu GS, Delzell E, Smith W, et al. Death, debility, and destitution following hip fracture. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci 2014;69:346–353  
26. Miao J, Brismar K, Nyrén O, Ugarph-Morawski A, Ye W. Elevated hip fracture risk in type 1 diabetic patients: a population-based cohort study in Sweden. Diabetes Care 2005;28:2850–2855  
27. Wang H, Ba Y, Xing Q, Du J-L. Diabetes mellitus and the risk of fractures at specific sites: a meta-analysis. BMJ Open 2019;9:e024067  
28. Weber DR, Haynes K, Leonard MB, Willi SM, Denburg MR. Type 1 diabetes is associated with an increased risk of fracture across the life span: a population-based cohort study using The Health Improvement Network (THIN). Diabetes Care 2015;38:1913–1920  
29. Leanza G, Maddaloni E, Pitocco D, et al. Risk factors for fragility fractures in type 1 diabetes. Bone 2019;125:194–199  
30. Janghorbani M, Van Dam RM, Willett WC, Hu FB. Systematic review of type 1 and type 2 diabetes mellitus and risk of fracture. Am J Epidemiol 2007;166:495–505  
31. Napoli N, Schwartz AV, Schafer AL, et al.; Osteoporotic Fractures in Men (MrOS) Study Research Group. Vertebral fracture risk in diabetic elderly men: the MrOS study. J Bone Miner Res 2018;33:63–69  
32. Koromani F, Oei L, Shevroja E, et al. Vertebral fractures in individuals with type 2 diabetes: more than skeletal complications alone. Diabetes Care 2020;43:137–144  
33. Faraj M, Schwartz AV, Burghardt AJ, et al. Risk factors for bone microarchitecture impairments in older men with type 2 diabetes - the MrOS study. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2025;110:e1660–e1669  
34. Schwartz AV, Vittinghoff E, Bauer DC, et al.; Study of Osteoporotic Fractures (SOF) Research Group; Osteoporotic Fractures in Men (MrOS) Research Group; Health, Aging, and Body Composition (Health ABC) Research Group. Association of BMD and FRAX score with risk of fracture in older adults with type 2 diabetes. JAMA 2011;305:2184–2192  
35. Hidayat K, Fang Q-L, Shi B-M, Qin L-Q. Influence of glycemic control and hypoglycemia on the risk of fracture in patients with diabetes mellitus: a systematic review and meta-analysis of observational studies. Osteoporos Int 2021;32:1693–1704  
36. Wang B, Wang Z, Poundarik AA, et al. Unmasking fracture risk in type 2 diabetes: the association of longitudinal glycemic hemoglobin level and medications. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2022;107:e1390–e1401  
37. Komorita Y, Iwase M, Fujii H, et al. Both hypo- and hyperglycaemia are associated with increased fracture risk in Japanese people with type 2 diabetes: the Fukuoka Diabetes Registry. Diabet Med 2020;37:838–847  
38. Majumdar SR, Leslie WD, Lix LM, et al. Longer duration of diabetes strongly impacts fracture risk assessment: the Manitoba BMD cohort. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2016;101:4489–4496  
39. Van Hulten V, Driessen JHM, Andersen S, et al. Fracture risk revisited: bone mineral density T-score and fracture risk in type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Obes Metab 2024;26:5325–5335  
40. Napoli N, Strollo R, Paladini A, Briganti SI, Pozzilli P, Epstein S. Corrigendum to “The Alliance of Mesenchymal Stem Cells, Bone, and Diabetes. Int J Endocrinol 2017;2017:5924671  
41. Vavanikunnel J, Charlier S, Becker C, et al. Association between glycemic control and risk of fracture in diabetic patients: a nested case-control study. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2019;104:1645–1654  
42. Strotmeyer ES, Cauley JA, Schwartz AV, et al. Nontraumatic fracture risk with diabetes mellitus and impaired fasting glucose in older white and black adults: the health, aging, and body composition study. Arch Intern Med 2005;165:1612–1617  
43. Schwartz AV, Vittinghoff E, Sellmeyer DE, et al.; Health, Aging, and Body Composition Study. Diabetes-related complications, glycemic control, and falls in older adults. Diabetes Care 2008;31:391–396  
44. Piccoli A, Cannata F, Strollo R, et al. Sclerostin regulation, microarchitecture, and advanced glycation end-products in the bone of elderly women with type 2 diabetes. J Bone Miner Res 2020;35:2415–2422  
45. Leanza G, Cannata F, Faraj M, et al. Bone canonical Wnt signaling is downregulated in type 2 diabetes and associates with higher advanced glycation end-products (AGEs) content and reduced bone strength. Elife 2024;12:RP90437  
46. Tramontana F, Napoli N, Litwack-Harrison S, et al. More rapid bone mineral density loss in older men with diabetes: the Osteoporotic Fractures in Men (MrOS) Study. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2024;109:e2283–e2290  
47. Ferrari SL, Abrahamsen B, Napoli N, et al.; Bone and Diabetes Working Group of IOF. Diagnosis and management of bone fragility in diabetes: an emerging challenge. Osteoporos Int 2018;29:2585–2596  
48. Leslie WD, Johansson H, McCloskey EV, Harvey NC, Kanis JA, Hans D. Comparison of methods for improving fracture risk assessment in diabetes: the Manitoba BMD Registry. J Bone Miner Res 2018;33:1923–1930  
49. Ferrari S, Eastell R, Napoli N, et al. Denosumab in postmenopausal women with osteoporosis and diabetes: subgroup analysis of FREEDOM and FREEDOM extension. Bone 2020;134:115268  
50. Napoli N, Conte C, Eastell R, et al. Bone turnover markers do not predict fracture risk in type 2 diabetes. J Bone Miner Res 2020;35:2363–2371  
51. International Society for Pediatric and Adolescent Diabetes. ISPAD Clinical Practice Consensus Guidelines 2022. Accessed 25 August 2025. Available from https://www.ispad.org/resources/ispad-clinical-practice-consensus-guidelines/2022-ispad-clinical-practice-consensus-guidelines/ispad-cpcg-2022-english.html  
52. LeBoff MS, Greenspan SL, Insogna KL, et al. The clinician’s guide to prevention and treatment of osteoporosis. Osteoporos Int 2022;33:2049–2102  
53. Armamento-Villareal R, Aguirre L, Napoli N, et al. Changes in thigh muscle volume predict bone mineral density response to lifestyle therapy in frail, obese older adults. Osteoporos Int 2014;25:551–558  
54. Ebeling PR, Adler RA, Jones G, et al. Management of endocrine disease: therapeutics of vitamin D. Eur J Endocrinol 2018;179:R239–R259  
55. Maddaloni E, Cavallari I, Napoli N, Conte C. Vitamin D and diabetes mellitus. Front Horm Res 2018;50:161–176  
56. Iolascon G, Gimigliano R, Bianco M, et al. Are dietary supplements and nutraceuticals effective for musculoskeletal health and cognitive function?  

2025  December 10 on guest by http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S61/848865/dc26s004.pdf Downloaded from



---


diabetesjournals.org/care     Comprehensive Medical  Evaluation  and  Assessment  of  Comorbidities  S83

A scoping review. J Nutr Health Aging 2017;21:527–538  
57. National Institutes of Health. Calcium—fact sheet for health professionals. Accessed 27 August 2025. Available from https://ods.od.nih.gov/factsheets/Calcium-HealthProfessional  
58. Rosen CJ, Abrams SA, Aloia JF, et al. IOM committee members respond to Endocrine Society vitamin D guideline. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2012;97:1146–1152  
59. National Institutes of Health. Vitamin D—fact sheet for health professionals. Accessed 27 August 2025. Available from https://ods.od.nih.gov/factsheets/VitaminD-HealthProfessional  
60. Carmel AS, Shieh A, Bang H, Bockman RS. The 25(OH)D level needed to maintain a favorable bisphosphonate response is ≥33 ng/ml. Osteoporos Int 2012;23:2479–2487  
61. Holick MF, Siris ES, Binkley N, et al. Prevalence of vitamin D inadequacy among postmenopausal North American women receiving osteoporosis therapy. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2005;90:3215–3224  
62. U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Vitamin D, Calcium, or Combined Supplementation for the Primary Prevention of Falls and Fractures in Community-Dwelling Adults: preventive Medication. Accessed 25 September 2025. Available from https://www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/uspstf/draft-recommendation/vitamin-d-calcium-combined-supplementation-primary-prevention-falls-fractures-communitydwelling-adults.  
63. Sinclair AJ, Abdelhafiz A, Dunning T, et al. An international position statement on the management of frailty in diabetes mellitus: summary of recommendations 2017. J Frailty Aging 2018;7:10–20  
64. Eastell R, Vittinghoff E, Lui L-Y, et al. Diabetes mellitus and the benefit of antiresorptive therapy on fracture risk. J Bone Miner Res 2022;37:2121–2131  
65. Langdahl BL, Silverman S, Fujiwara S, et al. Real-world effectiveness of teriparatide on fracture reduction in patients with osteoporosis and comorbidities or risk factors for fractures: integrated analysis of 4 prospective observational studies. Bone 2018;116:58–66  
66. Schwartz AV, Pavo I, Alam J, et al. Teriparatide in patients with osteoporosis and type 2 diabetes. Bone 2016;91:152–158  
67. Napoli N, Pannacciulli N, Vittinghoff E, et al. Effect of denosumab on fasting glucose in women with diabetes or prediabetes from the FREEDOM trial. Diabetes Metab Res Rev 2018;34:e2991  
68. Tsur A, Cahn A, Levy L, Pollack R. Cardiovascular outcomes of romosozumab treatment-real-world data analysis. JBMR Plus 2025;9:ziae146  
69. Langdahl BL, Hofbauer LC, Forfar JC. Cardiovascular safety and sclerostin inhibition. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2021;106:1845–1853  
70. Cosman F, Crittenden DB, Adachi JD, et al. Romosozumab treatment in postmenopausal women with osteoporosis. N Engl J Med 2016;375:1532–1543  
71. Conley RB, Adib G, Adler RA, et al. Secondary fracture prevention: consensus clinical recommendations from a multistakeholder coalition. J Bone Miner Res 2020;35:36–52  
72. Hofbauer LC, Rachner TD. More DATA to guide sequential osteoporosis therapy. Lancet 2015;386:1116–1118  
73. Palermo A, D’Onofrio L, Eastell R, Schwartz AV, Pozzilli P, Napoli N. Oral anti-diabetic drugs and fracture risk, cut to the bone: safe or dangerous? A narrative review. Osteoporos Int 2015;26:2073–2089  
74. Maddaloni E, Coleman RL, Holman RR. Risk factors for bone fractures in type 2 diabetes and the impact of once-weekly exenatide: insights from an EXSCEL post-hoc analysis. Diabetes Res Clin Pract 2025;223:112125  
75. Loke YK, Singh S, Furberg CD. Long-term use of thiazolidinediones and fractures in type 2 diabetes: a meta-analysis. CMAJ 2009;180:32–39  
76. Dormandy J, Bhattacharya M, van Troostenburg de Bruyn A-R; PROactive Investigators. Safety and tolerability of pioglitazone in high-risk patients with type 2 diabetes: an overview of data from PROactive. Drug Saf 2009;32:187–202  
77. Schwartz AV, Chen H, Ambrosius WT, et al. Effects of TZD use and discontinuation on fracture rates in ACCORD bone study. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2015;100:4059–4066  
78. Hidayat K, Du X, Wu M-J, Shi B-M. The use of metformin, insulin, sulphonylureas, and thiazolidinediones and the risk of fracture: systematic review and meta-analysis of observational studies. Obes Rev 2019;20:1494–1503  
79. Napoli N, Strotmeyer ES, Ensrud KE, et al. Fracture risk in diabetic elderly men: the MrOS study. Diabetologia 2014;57:2057–2065  
80. Hidayat K, Du X, Shi B-M. Risk of fracture with dipeptidyl peptidase-4 inhibitors, glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor agonists, or sodium-glucose cotransporter-2 inhibitors in real-world use: systematic review and meta-analysis of observational studies. Osteoporos Int 2019;30:1923–1940  
81. Chai S, Liu F, Yang Z, et al. Risk of fracture with dipeptidyl peptidase-4 inhibitors, glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor agonists, or sodium-glucose cotransporter-2 inhibitors in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus: a systematic review and network meta-analysis combining 177 randomized controlled trials with a median follow-up of 26 weeks. Front Pharmacol 2022;13:825417  
82. Karam L, Mabilleau G, Paccou J. Effects of glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor agonists on bone health in people living with obesity. Osteoporos Int. 8 September 2025 [Epub ahead of print]. DOI: 10.1007/s00198-025-07664-1  
83. Bilezikian JP, Watts NB, Usiskin K, et al. Evaluation of bone mineral density and bone biomarkers in patients with type 2 diabetes treated with canagliflozin. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2016;101:44–51  
84. Watts NB, Bilezikian JP, Usiskin K, et al. Effects of canagliflozin on fracture risk in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2016;101:157–166  
85. Perkovic V, Jardine MJ, Neal B, et al.; CREDENCE Trial Investigators. Canagliflozin and renal outcomes in type 2 diabetes and nephropathy. N Engl J Med 2019;380:2295–2306  
86. Neal B, Perkovic V, Matthews DR. Canagliflozin and cardiovascular and renal events in type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med 2017;377:2099  
87. Li X, Li T, Cheng Y, et al. Effects of SGLT2 inhibitors on fractures and bone mineral density in type 2 diabetes: an updated meta-analysis. Diabetes Metab Res Rev 2019;35:e3170  
88. Suh S, Kim KW. Diabetes and cancer: cancer should be screened in routine diabetes assessment. Diabetes Metab J 2019;43:733–743  
89. Giovannucci E, Harlan DM, Archer MC, et al. Diabetes and cancer: a consensus report. CA Cancer J Clin 2010;60:207–221  
90. Aggarwal G, Kamada P, Chari ST. Prevalence of diabetes mellitus in pancreatic cancer compared to common cancers. Pancreas 2013;42:198–201  
91. Cho J, Scragg R, Petrov MS. Postpancreatitis diabetes confers higher risk for pancreatic cancer than type 2 diabetes: results from a nationwide cancer registry. Diabetes Care 2020;43:2106–2112  
92. Ninomiya I, Yamazaki K, Oyama K, et al. Pioglitazone inhibits the proliferation and metastasis of human pancreatic cancer cells. Oncol Lett 2014;8:2709–2714  
93. Hendriks AM, Schrijnders D, Kleefstra N, et al. Sulfonylurea derivatives and cancer, friend or foe? Eur J Pharmacol 2019;861:172598  
94. Hua Y, Zheng Y, Yao Y, Jia R, Ge S, Zhuang A. Metformin and cancer hallmarks: shedding new lights on therapeutic repurposing. J Transl Med 2023;21:403  
95. Wang L, Xu R, Kaelber DC, Berger NA. Glucagon-like peptide 1 receptor agonists and 13 obesity-associated cancers in patients with type 2 diabetes. JAMA Netw Open 2024;7:e2421305  
96. Morales DR, Bu F, Viernes B, et al. Risk of thyroid tumors with glp-1 receptor agonists: a retrospective cohort study. Diabetes Care 2025;48:1386–1394  
97. Xue M, Xu W, Ou Y-N, et al. Diabetes mellitus and risks of cognitive impairment and dementia: a systematic review and meta-analysis of 144 prospective studies. Ageing Res Rev 2019;55:100944  
98. Ohara T, Doi Y, Ninomiya T, et al. Glucose tolerance status and risk of dementia in the community: the Hisayama study. Neurology 2011;77:1126–1134  
99. Kciuk M, Kruczkowska W, Gałęziewska J, et al. Alzheimer’s disease as type 3 diabetes: understanding the link and implications. Int J Mol Sci 2024;25:11955  
100. Hanyu H. Diabetes-related dementia. Adv Exp Med Biol 2019;1128:147–160  
101. Gudala K, Bansal D, Schifano F, Bhansali A. Diabetes mellitus and risk of dementia: a meta-analysis of prospective observational studies. J Diabetes Investig 2013;4:640–650  
102. Tang X, Cardoso MA, Yang J, Zhou J-B, Simó R. Impact of intensive glucose control on brain health: meta-analysis of cumulative data from 16,584 patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus. Diabetes Ther 2021;12:765–779  
103. Launer LJ, Miller ME, Williamson JD, et al.; ACCORD MIND investigators. Effects of intensive glucose lowering on brain structure and function in people with type 2 diabetes (ACCORD MIND): a randomised open-label substudy. Lancet Neurol 2011;10:969–977  
104. Xiao Y, Hong X, Neelagar R, Mo H. Association between glycated hemoglobin A1c levels, control status, and cognitive function in type 2 diabetes: a prospective cohort study. Sci Rep 2025;15:5011  
105. McCoy RG, Galindo RJ, Swarna KS, et al. Sociodemographic, clinical, and treatment-related factors associated with hyperglycemic crises among adults with type 1 or type 2 diabetes in the US from 2014 to 2020. JAMA Netw Open 2021;4:e2123471  
106. Mair ML, Athavale R, Abdelhafiz AH. Practical considerations for managing patients with diabetes  



---

S84   Comprehensive Medical  Evaluation  and  Assessment  of  Comorbidities     Diabetes Care Volume  49,  Supplement  1,  January  2026

and dementia. Expert Rev Endocrinol Metab 2017;              diseases: consensus report of the Joint Workshop                  in middle-aged and older adults with and without
12:429–440                                                   by  the  European  Federation  of  Periodontology                 diabetes. Diabetes Res Clin Pract 2021;182:109114
107. Punthakee  Z,  Miller  ME,  Launer  LJ,  et  al.;       (EFP)  and  the  European  arm  of  the  World                    138. Streckmann  F,  Balke  M,  Cavaletti  G,  et  al.
ACCORD-MIND   Investigators.           Poor  cognitive       Organization of Family Doctors (WONCA Europe).                    Exercise and neuropathy: systematic review with
function and risk of severe hypoglycemia in type 2           J Clin Periodontol 2023;50:819–841                                meta-analysis. Sports Med 2022;52:1043–1065
diabetes:  post  hoc  epidemiologic  analysis  of  the       122.            Lalla  E,  Papapanou  PN.  Diabetes  mellitus     139. Jing X, Chen J, Dong Y, et al. Related factors
ACCORD trial. Diabetes Care 2012;35:787–793                  and periodontitis: a tale of two common interrelated              of  quality  of  life  of  type  2  diabetes  patients:  a
108.       Lacy ME, Gilsanz P, Eng C, Beeri MS, Karter       diseases. Nat Rev Endocrinol 2011;7:738–748                       systematic  review  and  meta-analysis.  Health
AJ,  Whitmer  RA.  Severe  hypoglycemia  and                 123.               Christgau  M,  Palitzsch  KD,  Schmalz  G,     Qual Life Outcomes 2018;16:189
cognitive  function  in  older  adults  with  type  1        Kreiner  U,  Frenzel  S.  Healing  response  to  non-             140. Yoon  S-J,  Kim  K-I.  Frailty  and  disability  in
diabetes:  the  Study  of  Longevity  in  Diabetes           surgical  periodontal  therapy  in  patients  with                diabetes. Ann Geriatr Med Res 2019;23:165–169
(SOLID). Diabetes Care 2020;43:541–548                       diabetes  mellitus:  clinical,  microbiological,  and             141. World Health Organization. WHO Disability
109.        Lee AK, Rawlings AM, Lee CJ, et al. Severe       immunologic results. J Clin Periodontol 1998;25:                  Assessment  Schedule  2.0  (WHODAS  2.0).  Accessed
hypoglycaemia,  mild  cognitive  impairment,                 112–124                                                           28 August 2025. Available from https://www
dementia and brain volumes in older adults with              124.          Retzepi M, Donos N. The effect of diabetes          .who.int/standards/classifications/international-
type  2  diabetes:  the  Atherosclerosis  Risk  in           mellitus  on  osseous  healing.  Clin  Oral  Implants             classification-of-functioning-disability-and-health/
Communities (ARIC) cohort study. Diabetologia                Res 2010;21:673–681                                               who-disability-assessment-schedule
2018;61:1956–1965                                            125.              United  States  Code.  Americans  with          142. Diabetes  Distress  Assessment  and  Resource
110.  Ye  M,  Yang  Q,  Zhang  L,  et  al.  Effect  of       Disabilities  Act  of  1990.  Pub.  L.  No.  101–336              Center.  Diabetes  Distress  Scale  (DDS).  Accessed  28
hypoglycemic  events  on  cognitive  function  in            42 U.S.C. § 2. 104 Stat. 328. p. 101–336.                         August 2025. Available from https://diabetesdistress
individuals with type 2 diabetes mellitus: a dose-           126. United States Code. Americans with Disabilities              .org/take-dd-survey/
response  meta-analysis.  Front  Neurol  2024;15:            Act  Amendments  Act  of  2008.  Pub.  L.  No.  110–325           143. Hill-Briggs F, Adler NE, Berkowitz SA, et al.
1394499                                                      42 U.S.C.A. § 12101 et seq                                        Social  determinants  of  health  and  diabetes:  a
111. Mattishent  K,  Loke  YK.          Bi-directional       127. Wong  E,  Backholer  K,  Gearon  E,  et  al.                 scientific review. Diabetes Care 2020;44:258–279
interaction between hypoglycaemia and cognitive              Diabetes and  risk of  physical disability  in  adults:           144. Tan T-W, Shih C-D, Concha-Moore KC, et al.
impairment  in  elderly  patients  treated  with             a  systematic  review  and  meta-analysis.  Lancet                Correction:  disparities  in  outcomes  of  patients
glucose-lowering agents: a systematic review and             Diabetes Endocrinol 2013;1:106–114                                admitted with diabetic foot infections. PLoS One
meta-analysis.  Diabetes  Obes  Metab  2016;18:              128. Tomic D, Shaw JE, Magliano DJ. The burden                    2019;14:e0215532
135–141                                                      and  risks  of emerging  complications  of diabetes               145. Skrepnek  GH,  Mills  JL,  Armstrong  DG.  A
112.   Giorda  CB,  Ozzello  A,  Gentile  S,  et  al.;       mellitus. Nat Rev Endocrinol 2022;18:525–539                      diabetic emergency one million feet long: disparities
HYPOS-1 Study Group of AMD. Incidence and risk               129. Lisy  K,  Campbell  JM, Tufanaru  C,  Moola  S,              and  burdens  of  illness  among  diabetic  foot  ulcer
factors for severe and symptomatic hypoglycemia              Lockwood C. The prevalence of disability among                    cases within emergency departments in the United
in type 1 diabetes. Results of the HYPOS-1 study.            people with cancer, cardiovascular disease, chronic               States, 2006–2010. PLoS One 2015;10:e0134914
Acta Diabetol 2015;52:845–853                                respiratory  disease  and/or  diabetes:  a  systematic            146. Lecube A, Hernández C, Genesca J, Simó R.
113.        Jacobson AM, Ryan CM, Braffett BH, et al.;       review. Int J Evid Based Healthc 2018;16:154–166                  Proinflammatory  cytokines,  insulin  resistance,
DCCT/EDIC Research Group. Cognitive performance              130. Yang  Y,  Hu  X,  Zhang  Q,  Zou  R.  Diabetes               and insulin secretion in chronic hepatitis C patients:
declines  in  older  adults  with  type  1  diabetes:        mellitus  and  risk  of  falls  in  older  adults:  a             a  case-control  study.  Diabetes  Care  2006;29:
results from 32 years of follow-up in the DCCT and           systematic review and meta-analysis. Age Ageing                   1096–1101
EDIC  Study.  Lancet  Diabetes  Endocrinol  2021;9:          2016;45:761–767                                                   147. Hum J, Jou JH, Green PK, et al. Improvement
436–445                                                      131. Gregg EW, Menke A. Diabetes and Disability.                  in  glycemic  control  of  type  2  diabetes  after
114.       Casanova L, Hughes FJ, Preshaw PM. Diabetes       In  Diabetes  in  America,  3rd  ed.  Cowie  CC,                  successful treatment of hepatitis C virus. Diabetes
and periodontal disease: a two-way relationship. Br          Casagrande  SS,  Menke  A,  et  al.,  Eds.  Bethesda,             Care 2017;40:1173–1180
Dent J 2014;217:433–437                                      MD,  National  Institute  of  Diabetes  and  Digestive            148. Carnovale C, Pozzi M, Dassano A, et al. The
115.       Eke PI, Thornton-Evans GO, Wei L, Borgnakke       and Kidney Diseases, 2018. Available from https://                impact  of  a  successful  treatment  of  hepatitis  C
WS,  Dye BA,  Genco  RJ.  Periodontitis  in  US  adults:     www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/33651544                              virus  on  glyco-metabolic  control  in  diabetic
National  Health  and  Nutrition  Examination Survey         132. Khan  KS,  Andersen  H.  The  Impact  of                     patients: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
2009–2014. J Am Dent Assoc 2018;149:576–588.e6               diabetic  neuropathy  on  activities  of  daily  living,          Acta Diabetol 2019;56:341–354
116.        Borgnakke  WS,  Ylostalo  PV,  Taylor  GW,       postural  balance  and  risk  of  falls  -  a  systematic         149. Kouidrat  Y,  Pizzol  D,  Cosco  T,  et  al.  High
Genco  RJ.  Effect  of  periodontal  disease  on             review. J Diabetes Sci Technol 2022;16:289–294                    prevalence of erectile dysfunction  in diabetes:  a
diabetes:  systematic  review  of  epidemiologic             133. Elafros MA, Andersen H, Bennett DL, et                       systematic  review  and  meta-analysis  of  145
observational  evidence.  J  Periodontol  2013;84:           al.  Towards  prevention  of  diabetic  peripheral                studies. Diabet Med 2017;34:1185–1192
S135–S152                                                    neuropathy:  clinical  presentation,  pathogenesis,               150. Grover  SA,  Lowensteyn  I,  Kaouache  M,  et
117.      Simpson  TC,  Clarkson  JE, Worthington  HV,       and  new  treatments.  Lancet  Neurol  2022;21:                   al. The  prevalence  of erectile  dysfunction  in  the
et  al.  Treatment  of  periodontitis  for  glycaemic        922–936                                                           primary  care  setting:  importance  of  risk  factors
control in people with diabetes mellitus. Cochrane           134.      Selvarajah D, Kar D, Khunti K, et al. Diabetic          for  diabetes  and  vascular  disease.  Arch  Intern
Database Syst Rev 2022;4:CD004714                            peripheral neuropathy: advances in diagnosis and                  Med 2006;166:213–219
118.        Ziemer  DC,  Barnes  CS,  Rupasinghe  RSM,       strategies  for  screening  and  early  intervention.             151. Allen  MS, Walter  EE.  Erectile  dysfunction:
Khare  S.  662-P:  Oral  health:  neglected  diabetes        Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol 2019;7:938–948                         an  umbrella  review  of  meta-analyses  of  risk-
intervention. Diabetes 69(Suppl 1):662-P                     135. Fatma  S,  Noohu  MM.  Classification  of                    factors,  treatment,  and  prevalence  outcomes.  J
119.         Lipman RD, O’Brien KK, Bardsley JK, Magee       functionality  of  people  with  diabetic  peripheral             Sex Med 2019;16:531–541
MF.  A  scoping  review  of  the  relation  between          neuropathy  based  on  international  classification              152. Ma  RC-W,  So  W-Y,  Yang  X,  et  al.  Erectile
toothbrushing and diabetes knowledge, glycemic               of  functioning,  disability  and  health  core  set              dysfunction  predicts  coronary  heart  disease  in
control, and oral health outcomes in people with             (ICF-CS)  of  diabetes  mellitus.  J  Diabetes  Metab             type 2 diabetes. J Am Coll Cardiol 2008;51:2045–2050
type  2  diabetes.  Diabetes  Spectr  2023;36:               Disord 2020;19:213–221                                            153. Gazzaruso  C,  Solerte  SB,  Pujia  A,  et  al.
364–372                                                      136.       Zhang Y, Lazzarini PA, McPhail SM, van Netten          Erectile dysfunction as a predictor of cardiovascular
120.            Abdul Aziz AF, Mohd-Dom TN, Mustafa N,       JJ,  Armstrong  DG,  Pacella  RE.  Global  disability             events  and  death  in  diabetic  patients  with
et al. Screening for type 2 diabetes and periodontitis       burdens  of  diabetes-related  lower-extremity                    angiographically proven asymptomatic coronary
patients  (CODAPT-My):  a  multidisciplinary  care           complications  in  1990  and  2016.  Diabetes                     artery  disease:  a  potential  protective  role  for
approach. BMC Health Serv Res 2022;22:1034                   Care 2020;43:964–974                                              statins  and  5-phosphodiesterase  inhibitors.  J
121.       Herrera  D,  Sanz  M,  Shapira  L,  et  al.       137.        Tsai Y-H, Chuang L-L, Lee Y-J, Chiu C-J. How          Am Coll Cardiol 2008;51:2040–2044
Association  between  periodontal  diseases  and             does  diabetes  accelerate  normal  aging?  An                    154. Kalter-Leibovici O, Wainstein J, Ziv A, et al.;
cardiovascular diseases, diabetes and respiratory            examination  of  ADL,  IADL,  and  mobility  disability           Israel Diabetes Research Group (IDRG) Investigators.

2025  December
      10 on  guest
                by     http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S61/848865/dc26s004.pdf
                       from   Downloaded

---


diabetesjournals.org/care     Comprehensive Medical  Evaluation  and  Assessment  of  Comorbidities  S85

Clinical, socioeconomic, and lifestyle parameters associated with erectile dysfunction among diabetic men. Diabetes Care 2005;28:1739–1744  
155. De Berardis G, Pellegrini F, Franciosi M, et al.; QuED (Quality of Care and Outcomes in Type 2 Diabetes) Study Group. Longitudinal assessment of quality of life in patients with type 2 diabetes and self-reported erectile dysfunction. Diabetes Care 2005;28:2637–2643  
156. Navaneethan SD, Vecchio M, Johnson DW, et al. Prevalence and correlates of self-reported sexual dysfunction in CKD: a meta-analysis of observational studies. Am J Kidney Dis 2010;56:670–685  
157. Hackett G, Kirby M, Wylie K, et al. British Society for Sexual Medicine guidelines on the management of erectile dysfunction in men-2017. J Sex Med 2018;15:430–457  
158. Corona G, Rastrelli G, Morgentaler A, Sforza A, Mannucci E, Maggi M. Meta-analysis of results of testosterone therapy on sexual function based on international index of erectile function scores. Eur Urol 2017;72:1000–1011  
159. Dhindsa S, Miller MG, McWhirter CL, et al. Testosterone concentrations in diabetic and nondiabetic obese men. Diabetes Care 2010;33:1186–1192  
160. Grossmann M. Low testosterone in men with type 2 diabetes: significance and treatment. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2011;96:2341–2353  
161. Bhasin S, Cunningham GR, Hayes FJ, et al.; Task Force, Endocrine Society. Testosterone therapy in men with androgen deficiency syndromes: an Endocrine Society clinical practice guideline. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2010;95:2536–2559  
162. Bhasin S, Brito JP, Cunningham GR, et al. Testosterone therapy in men with hypogonadism: an Endocrine Society clinical practice guideline. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2018;103:1715–1744  
163. Braga MAP, Rivera A, Marinheiro G, et al. Long-term cardiovascular safety of testosterone-replacement therapy in middle-aged and older men: a meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Am J Cardiovasc Drugs 2025;25:767–777  
164. Shindel AW, Lue TF, Anawalt B, et al. Medical and Surgical Therapy of Erectile Dysfunction. In Endotext. Feingold KR, Anawalt B, Blackman MR, et al., Eds. South Dartmouth, MA, MDText.com, 2000. Available from https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25905163  
165. Lindau ST, Tang H, Gomero A, et al. Sexuality among middle-aged and older adults with diagnosed and undiagnosed diabetes: a national, population-based study. Diabetes Care 2010;33:2202–2210  
166. Shindel AW, Lue TF, Feingold KR. Sexual Dysfunction in Diabetes. In Endotext. Feingold KR, Anawalt B, Blackman MR, et al., Eds. South Dartmouth, MA, MDText.com, 2000. Available from https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25905326  
167. Pontiroli AE, Cortelazzi D, Morabito A. Female sexual dysfunction and diabetes: a systematic review and meta-analysis. J Sex Med 2013;10:1044–1051  
168. Van Cauwenberghe J, Enzlin P, Nefs G, et al. Prevalence of and risk factors for sexual dysfunctions in adults with type 1 or type 2 diabetes: results from Diabetes MILES - Flanders. Diabet Med 2022;39:e14676  
169. Pyrgidis N, Mykoniatis I, Tishukov M, et al. Sexual dysfunction in women with end-stage renal disease: a systematic review and meta-analysis. J Sex Med 2021;18:936–945  
170. Haugstvedt A, Jørgensen J, Strandberg RB, et al. Sexual dysfunction in women with type 1 diabetes in Norway: a cross-sectional study on the prevalence and associations with physical and psychosocial complications. Diabet Med 2022;39:e14704  
171. Buskoven MEH, Kjørholt EKH, Strandberg RB, Søfteland E, Haugstvedt A. Sexual dysfunction in women with type 1 diabetes in Norway: a qualitative study of women’s experiences. Diabet Med 2022;39:e14856  
172. Hendrieckx C, Halliday JA, Russell-Green S, et al. Adults with diabetes distress often want to talk with their health professionals about it: findings from an audit of 4 Australian specialist diabetes clinics. Can J Diabetes 2020;44:473–480  
173. Di Stasi V, Maseroli E, Vignozzi L. Female sexual dysfunction in diabetes: mechanisms, diagnosis and treatment. Curr Diabetes Rev 2022;18:e171121198002  
174. Wing RR, Bond DS, Gendrano IN, 3rd, et al.; Sexual Dysfunction Subgroup of the Look AHEAD Research Group. Effect of intensive lifestyle intervention on sexual dysfunction in women with type 2 diabetes: results from an ancillary Look AHEAD study. Diabetes Care 2013;36:2937–2944  
175. Rinella ME, Lazarus JV, Ratziu V, et al.; NAFLD Nomenclature Consensus Group. A multisociety Delphi consensus statement on new fatty liver disease nomenclature. Hepatology 2023;78:1966–1986  
176. Rinella ME, Neuschwander-Tetri BA, Siddiqui MS, et al. AASLD practice guidance on the clinical assessment and management of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. Hepatology 2023;77:1797–1835  
177. Lomonaco R, Godinez Leiva E, Bril F, et al. Advanced liver fibrosis is common in patients with type 2 diabetes followed in the outpatient setting: the need for systematic screening. Diabetes Care 2021;44:399–406  
178. Ciardullo S, Monti T, Perseghin G. High prevalence of advanced liver fibrosis assessed by transient elastography among U.S. adults with type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Care 2021;44:519–525  
179. Barb D, Repetto EM, Stokes ME, Shankar SS, Cusi K. Type 2 diabetes mellitus increases the risk of hepatic fibrosis in individuals with obesity and nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. Obesity (Silver Spring) 2021;29:1950–1960  
180. Younossi ZM, Golabi P, Price JK, et al. The global epidemiology of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease and nonalcoholic steatohepatitis among patients with type 2 diabetes. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol 2024;22:1999–2010  
181. Stefan N, Cusi K. A global view of the interplay between non-alcoholic fatty liver disease and diabetes. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol 2022;10:284–296  
182. Harrison SA, Gawrieh S, Roberts K, et al. Prospective evaluation of the prevalence of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease and steatohepatitis in a large middle-aged US cohort. J Hepatol 2021;75:284–291  
183. Castera L, Laouenan C, Vallet-Pichard A, et al.; QUID-NASH investigators. High prevalence of NASH and advanced fibrosis in type 2 diabetes: a prospective study of 330 outpatients undergoing liver biopsies for elevated ALT, using a low threshold. Diabetes Care 2023;46:1354–1362  
184. Paik JM, Golabi P, Younossi Y, Mishra A, Younossi ZM. Changes in the global burden of chronic liver diseases from 2012 to 2017: the growing impact of NAFLD. Hepatology 2020;72:1605–1616  
185. Simon TG, Roelstraete B, Khalili H, Hagström H, Ludvigsson JF. Mortality in biopsy-confirmed nonalcoholic fatty liver disease: results from a nationwide cohort. Gut 2021;70:1375–1382  
186. Burra P, Becchetti C, Germani G. NAFLD and liver transplantation: disease burden, current management and future challenges. JHEP Rep 2020;2:100192  
187. Corbin KD, Driscoll KA, Pratley RE, Smith SR, Maahs DM, Mayer-Davis EJ; Advancing Care for Type 1 Diabetes and Obesity Network (ACT1ON). Obesity in type 1 diabetes: pathophysiology, clinical impact, and mechanisms. Endocr Rev 2018;39:629–663  
188. de Vries M, Westerink J, Kaasjager KHAH, de Valk HW. Prevalence of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) in patients with type 1 diabetes mellitus: a systematic review and meta-analysis. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2020;105:3842–3853  
189. Cusi K, Sanyal AJ, Zhang S, et al. Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) prevalence and its metabolic associations in patients with type 1 diabetes and type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Obes Metab 2017;19:1630–1634  
190. Ciardullo S, Perseghin G. Prevalence of elevated liver stiffness in patients with type 1 and type 2 diabetes: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Diabetes Res Clin Pract 2022;190:109981  
191. Younossi ZM, Ong JP, Takahashi H, et al.; Global Nonalcoholic Steatohepatitis Council. A global survey of physicians knowledge about nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol 2022;20:e1456–e1468  
192. Kanwal F, Shubrook JH, Younossi Z, et al. Preparing for the NASH epidemic: a call to action. Diabetes Care 2021;44:2162–2172  
193. Angulo P, Kleiner DE, Dam-Larsen S, et al. Liver fibrosis, but no other histologic features, is associated with long-term outcomes of patients with nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. Gastroenterology 2015;149:389–397  
194. Ekstedt M, Hagström H, Nasr P, et al. Fibrosis stage is the strongest predictor for disease-specific mortality in NAFLD after up to 33 years of follow-up. Hepatology 2015;61:1547–1554  
195. Taylor RS, Taylor RJ, Bayliss S, et al. Association between fibrosis stage and outcomes of patients with nonalcoholic fatty liver disease: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Gastroenterology 2020;158:1611–1625  
196. Sanyal AJ, Van Natta ML, Clark J, et al.; NASH Clinical Research Network (CRN). Prospective study of outcomes in adults with nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. N Engl J Med 2021;385:1559–1569  
197. Kanwal F, Shubrook JH, Adams LA, et al. Clinical care pathway for the risk stratification and management of patients with nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. Gastroenterology 2021;161:1657–1669  
198. Gellert-Kristensen H, Richardson TG, Davey Smith G, Nordestgaard BG, Tybjaerg-Hansen A, Stender S. Combined effect of PNPLA3, TM6SF2, and HSD17B13 variants on risk of cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma in the general population. Hepatology 2020;72:845–856  

2025  December 10 on guest by http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S61/848865/dc26s004.pdf Downloaded from
