

Diabetes Care  Volume 49, Supplement 1, January 2026

# 1. Improving Care and Promoting Health in Populations: Standards of Care in Diabetes—2026  
*American Diabetes Association Professional Practice Committee for Diabetes*  
*Diabetes Care 2026;49(Suppl. 1):S13–S26 | https://doi.org/10.2337/dc26-S001*

The American Diabetes Association (ADA) “Standards of Care in Diabetes” includes the ADA’s current clinical practice recommendations and is intended to provide the components of diabetes care, general treatment goals and guidelines, and tools to evaluate quality of care. Members of the ADA Professional Practice Committee for Diabetes, an interprofessional expert committee, are responsible for updating the Standards of Care annually, or more frequently as warranted. For a detailed description of ADA standards, statements, and reports, as well as the evidence-grading system for ADA’s clinical practice recommendations and a full list of Professional Practice Committee members, please refer to Introduction and Methodology. Readers who wish to comment on the Standards of Care are invited to do so at professional.diabetes.org/SOC.

## SYSTEMS TO SUPPORT DIABETES POPULATION HEALTH

**Recommendations**  
**1.1** Ensure treatment decisions are timely, rely on evidence-based guidelines, address social determinants of health, and incorporate shared decision-making based on individual values, preferences, prognoses, comorbidities, and informed financial considerations. **B**  
**1.2** Align approaches to diabetes management with evidence-based care models. These models emphasize person-centered team care, integrated long-term treatment approaches to diabetes and comorbidities, and ongoing collaborative communication and goal setting among all team members and with people with diabetes. **A**  
**1.3** Care systems should facilitate in-person and virtual team-based care, include those knowledgeable and experienced in diabetes management as part of the team, and utilize patient registries, decision support tools, proactive care planning, and community involvement to meet needs of individuals with diabetes. **B**  
**1.4** Assess diabetes management, risk factors, and complications using reliable and relevant data metrics to improve processes of care and health outcomes, with attention to individual values, preferences, goals for care, and treatment burden, including costs of care. **B**  
**1.5** Health systems should adopt a culture of continuous quality improvement, implement benchmarking programs, and engage interprofessional teams to support sustainable and scalable process changes to improve quality of care and health outcomes. **A**

> *A complete list of members of the American Diabetes Association Professional Practice Committee for Diabetes can be found at https://doi.org/10.2337/dc26-SINT.*  
> *Duality of interest information for each contributor is available at https://doi.org/10.2337/dc26-SDIS.*  
> *Suggested citation: American Diabetes Association Professional Practice Committee for Diabetes. 1. Improving care and promoting health in populations: Standards of Care in Diabetes—2026. Diabetes Care 2026;49(Suppl. 1):S13–S26*  
>  
> © 2025 by the American Diabetes Association. Readers may use this work for educational, noncommercial purposes if properly cited and unaltered. The version of record may be linked at https://diabetesjournals.org/care, but ADA permission is required to post this work on any third-party site or platform. This publication and its contents may not be reproduced, distributed, or used for text or data mining, machine learning, or similar technologies without prior written permission. Requests to reuse, adapt, or distribute this work may be sent to permissions@diabetes.org. More information is available at https://diabetesjournals.org/journals/pages/license.

2025 December 10 on guest by http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S13/848832/dc26s001.pdf from Downloaded



---

S14   Improving Care and Promoting Health  in  Populations     Diabetes Care Volume  49,  Supplement  1,  January  2026

Diabetes and Population Health                        (4).  To  improve  health,  support  overall         years, affecting approximately 14.7 million
Population  health  is  a  multidimensional           well-being,  and eliminate disparities, it is        individuals between 2 and 19 years (19.7%
concept that refers to the health outcomes            crucial  to  address  these  determinants,           of all U.S. children and adolescents) (9).
of  a  group  of  individuals  and  the  poten-       particularly for individuals from racial and         Most  concerning  is  the  recent  rise  in
tially varied distribution of those outcomes          ethnic  minoritized  communities,  under-            the rates of diabetes complications among
within the group (1). These outcomes can              served geographic areas (rural or urban),            adults  with  diabetes  across  the  U.S.  ob-
be measured in terms of health indicators             and  those  facing  socioeconomic  barriers          served  since  the  early  2010s,  particularly
(mortality,  morbidity,  quality  of  life,  and      to  care  and  health  (5).  This  section  dis-     for  kidney  failure,  nontraumatic  lower-
functional  status),  disease  epidemiology           cusses  the  current  state  of  diabetes  and       extremity  amputations,  stroke,  heart  fail-
(incidence and prevalence), and behavioral            diabetes  care  in  the  U.S.  and  provides         ure, and hyperglycemic crises, while rates
and metabolic factors (physical activity, nu-         guidance for health care professionals as            of  myocardial  infarction  have  plateaued,
trition, A1C, time in range, etc.) (1). In clini-     well  as  health  systems,  community  part-         reversing decades of earlier improvements
cal  practice,  population  health  commonly          ners,  payors,  and  policymakers  on  im-           (10). The proportion of people with diabe-
refers to the measurement and improve-                proving the delivery of diabetes care to             tes who achieve recommended A1C, blood
ment  of  health  outcomes  for  a  defined           improve the health of all people at risk             pressure,  and  cholesterol  levels  has  fluc-
group of  individuals,  often those  receiv-          for or living with diabetes.                         tuated  over  the  years,  with  some  im-
ing care within a particular health system            To  provide  actionable  guidance  for  im-          provement  over  time  (11,12).  However,
or practice, and is central to operational            proving the health outcomes of people with           in  2015–2018  (the  time  frame  for  which
“population health management,” or the                or at risk for diabetes, this section examines       the most recent population-level data are
proactive,  team-based,  and  data-driven             care delivery and payment models demon-              available), just 50.5% of U.S. community-
approaches to improving health care expe-             strated  to  support  high-quality,  evidence-       dwelling  adults  with  diabetes  achieved
riences  and  team  well-being  while  mini-          based  care; offers guidance  on  practical          A1C  <7%,  and  75.4%  achieved  A1C
mizing  costs  and  addressing  inequities,  in       strategies  for  system-level  improvement,          <8%  (12).  The  goal  blood  pressure  of
alignment  with  the  Quadruple  Aim  (2).            including  identifying and  addressing  gaps in      <130/80  mmHg  was  achieved  by  just
More  broadly,  population  health  refers  to        diabetes  care  and  outcomes  experienced           47.7%, non-HDL cholesterol <130 mg/dL
the health of all people living in a geographic       by  population  subgroups;  and  discusses           was achieved by 55.7%, and all three risk
area  or  community,  and  it  centers  on            opportunities to expand access to health             factors were treated to goal in just 22.2%
upstream drivers of health that must be               care and diabetes self-management edu-               (12).  Importantly,  many  people  who  did
addressed,  often  through  cross-sector              cation  and  support  (DSMES)  through  tele-        not attain  A1C,  blood  pressure, and  lipid
collaboration and policy, to improve the              health,  mobile  platforms,  interprofessional       goals were not receiving any or adequate
broader conditions that influence health.             team care, and engagement of community-              pharmacotherapy  for  glycemia,  hyperten-
Clinical  practice  recommendations  are              based care partners and resources.                   sion,  and  dyslipidemia  management,  re-
tools  for  health  care  professionals  who                                                               spectively (i.e., were undertreated), which
seek  to  improve  health  across  popula-            State of Diabetes and Diabetes Care                  underscores the urgent need for care deliv-
tions; however, for optimal outcomes, di-             In 2021, an estimated 38.4 million people            ery systems and structural facilitators (i.e.,
abetes  care  must  also  be  individualized          were  living  with  diabetes,  representing          health and public health policies and pay-
for  each  person  with  diabetes  and  for           11.6%  of  the  U.S.  population.  This  in-         ment models) that enable timely and equi-
each  person’s  context,  as  well  as  across        cludes  38.1  million  adults  aged  18  years       table  delivery  of  evidence-based  care  and
the  life  span.  Thus,  efforts  to  improve         and older (14.7% of U.S. adults), of whom            address diabetes prevention and treatment
population  health  will  require  a  combi-          8.7 million were unaware of their diagno-            in communities (12).
nation  of  policy-level,  system-level,  and         sis. An additional 97.6 million adults aged          Many segments of the population face
person-level approaches. With such an in-             18  years  and  older  (38.0%  of  the  U.S.         additional  and  unique  challenges  to  dia-
tegrated approach in mind, the American               population)  were  living  with  prediabetes         betes  management,  resulting  in  higher
Diabetes Association (ADA) highlights the             (6),  and over 100 million adults  20 years          rates  of  diabetes  complications,  morbid-
importance  of  person-centered  care,  de-           and older (41.9% of U.S. adults) were liv-           ity, and mortality. These include children,
fined as care that considers an individual’s          ing with obesity (7), placing them at high           adolescents, and young adults; individuals
comorbidities  and  prognoses;  is  respect-                                                               with  complex  health  needs,  financial  or
ful of and responsive to individual prefer-           risk  for  developing  type  2  diabetes. The        other  social  hardships,  and/or  limited  En-
ences,  needs,  and  values;  and  ensures            prevalence of diabetes is increasing among           glish proficiency; and individuals in groups
that the individual’s values guide all clini-         children and adolescents as well. In 2017,           and  communities  that  have  been  histori-
cal  decisions  (3).  Social  determinants  of        the  year  for  which  the  most  recent  data       cally marginalized (6,10,12,13). The preva-
health  (SDOH)—factors  often  beyond  an             are available, the prevalence of type 1 dia-         lence  of  diabetes  among  adults  is  higher
individual’s  direct control  and  potentially        betes  was  2.15  per  10,000  individuals           among  non-Hispanic  Black  individuals
representing lifelong risks—play a signifi-           aged  19  years  and  under,  and  the  preva-       (17.4%),  non-Hispanic  Asian  individuals
cant role in both clinical and psychosocial           lence  of  type  2  diabetes  was  0.67  per         (16.7%), and Hispanic individuals (15.5%)
outcomes. SDOH are defined as the eco-                1,000 individuals 10–19 years of age (prev-          than among White individuals (13.6%). Di-
nomic, environmental, political, and social           alence  among  those  under  10  years  old          abetes  prevalence  is  also  higher  among
conditions in which people live, and their            was  too  low  to  be  reported)  (8).  Obesity      adults with less than a high school educa-
uneven  distribution  is  responsible  for  a         prevalence has also increased significantly          tion (13.1%) than among those with more
major part of health inequality worldwide             among children and adolescents in recent             than a high school education (6.9%), higher

2025  December
      10 on  guest
                by     http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S13/848832/dc26s001.pdf
                       from   Downloaded

---


diabetesjournals.org/care     Improving  Care and  Promoting Health  in  Populations  S15

among those from families living below the federal poverty level (13.1%) than among those at 500% of federal poverty level or higher (5.1%), and higher among those living in nonmetropolitan areas (9.5%) than among those living in metropolitan areas (8.1%) (6). There is also substantial county-level variation in diabetes complications, mortality, and disparities in complications and mortality experienced by minoritized racial and ethnic groups across the U.S. (13), underscoring the impacts of broader structural factors on health among historically marginalized populations.

Gaps and disparities in diabetes management and outcomes are also prevalent among children, adolescents, and young adults with diabetes in the U.S. Improving diabetes management early in life is essential for preventing adverse health outcomes and disability and improving quality of life both in the short- and long-term. There are important and nuanced considerations in treating diabetes and supporting children, adolescents, and young adults with diabetes that are distinct from those of older adults (14). Data from SEARCH for Diabetes in Youth (SEARCH), a population-based registry network of five centers across five U.S. states, showed that in 2014–2019, mean A1C was 9.1% (76 mmol/mol) among youth and young adults with type 1 diabetes and 8.9% (74 mmol/mol) in youth and young adults with type 2 diabetes; these values increased from 8.5% (70 mmol/mol) and 8.4% (68 mmol/mol), respectively, in 2002–2007 (15). Youth and young adults with type 1 diabetes who are non-Hispanic Black or Native American (compared with those who are non-Hispanic White), younger, not treated with insulin pump therapy, and from households with low annual income have significantly higher A1C levels (15). Data from a network of academic pediatric and adult centers across the U.S. revealed that between 2016 and 2018, mean A1C was 8.1% (65 mmol/mol) among children with type 1 diabetes at 5 years of age and 9.3% (78 mmol/mol) among children 15–18 years of age. Only 17% of youth under 18 years of age with type 1 diabetes achieved the recommended A1C goal of <7.5% (<58 mmol/mol), and A1C levels for non-Hispanic Black youth were higher than those for non-Hispanic or Hispanic White youth, a disparity that persisted after adjustment for socioeconomic status (16).

Diabetes and its associated health complications pose a significant financial hardship to individuals and society. It is estimated that the annual cost of diagnosed diabetes in the U.S. in 2022 was ≥$413 billion, including ≥$307 billion in direct health care costs and ≥$106 billion in reduced productivity (17). After adjusting for inflation, the economic costs of diabetes increased by 7% between 2017 and 2022 and by 35% between 2012 and 2022 (17). This is attributed to both the increased prevalence of diabetes and the higher cost per person with diabetes. People living with diabetes also face individual financial hardship, resulting in rationing or not taking prescribed medications, delaying care, and foregoing or rationing other expenditures, among other behaviors, and ultimately correlating with higher A1C, greater diabetes distress, and depressive symptoms (18).

The growing gaps in diabetes care quality and outcomes, the high and rising costs of diabetes care across the U.S., and the disparities experienced by individuals from racial and ethnic minoritized backgrounds and those facing socioeconomic barriers to care call for urgent, substantial, and multisectoral system-level improvements to care delivery (19).

## Evidence-Based Care Delivery and Payment Models to Improve Population Health

A major barrier to comprehensive high-quality diabetes care is a delivery system that is often fragmented, lacks clinical information capabilities, is not appropriately incentivized and funded, does not adequately engage people with diabetes and the communities where they live, and is poorly designed for the coordinated and longitudinal delivery of chronic care (20). Several models have been demonstrated to improve aspects of diabetes care delivery and health outcomes.

The Chronic Care Model (CCM) is a commonly used framework for describing diabetes care programs (21). It includes six core elements to optimize the care of people with chronic disease:

1. Delivery system design (moving from a reactive to a proactive care delivery system where planned visits are coordinated through a team-based approach)  
2. Self-management support  
3. Decision support, particularly at the point of care during a clinical encounter (basing care on evidence-based, effective care guidelines)  
4. Clinical information systems (using registries that can provide person-specific and population-based support to the care team)  
5. Community resources and policies (identifying or developing resources to support healthy lifestyles)  
6. Health systems (to create a quality-oriented culture)  

Randomized controlled trials of CCM interventions have shown that while interventions vary, programs that include core components of the CCM decrease A1C (mean difference [MD] −0.21% [95% CI −0.30 to −0.13], *P* < 0.001 compared with usual care), with greater improvements seen among adults with higher baseline A1C and with interventions that include four or more CCM elements (22). CCM-aligned programs also improved blood pressure levels and processes of diabetes care (e.g., screening for complications of diabetes), though there was no impact on cholesterol levels, tobacco use, or weight (23). Multiple studies have examined individual components of the CCM with respect to diabetes management and have found inconsistent levels of benefit with case management, team-based care, use of electronic patient registries, clinician education, clinician and patient reminders, and patient education and promotion of individual self-management (24). The inconsistencies in findings may be driven by heterogeneity of interventions, settings, and evaluation strategies as well as structural barriers to program utilization and needs of communities served.

Collaborative, interprofessional teams, which can bring together multiple disciplines within the health care system, payors, and community partners, are best suited to provide care for people with chronic conditions such as diabetes and to facilitate individuals’ self-management (**Table 1.1**) (25–27). The care team, which centers around the person with diabetes, should avoid therapeutic inertia and prioritize timely and appropriate modification of behavior change interventions (nutrition and physical activity), pharmacologic therapy, technology use, and/or social and financial support systems for individuals who have not achieved recommended individualized metabolic goals or are experiencing high burden of treatment. Engagement of an endocrinology team with expertise in diabetes management is important in situations when the complexity of diabetes



---



Improving Care and Promoting Health in Populations     Diabetes Care Volume 49, Supplement 1, January 2026

<table>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Subpopulation of a person with diabetes</th>
<th>Team members to engage in care</th>
<th>Unique care considerations</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>All adults with diabetes</td>
<td>Primary care clinician, CDCES, RDN, and other specialists as available and appropriate to treat comorbidities (<code>Table 4.1</code>)</td>
<td>Assess for and address social determinants of health.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Adults treated with intensive insulin therapy, including multiple daily injections of insulin and insulin pump therapy</td>
<td>Clinicians and other health care team members experienced in advanced diabetes management, including technology use</td>
<td>-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>All children and adolescents with diabetes</td>
<td>
Primary care clinician, pediatric endocrinologist, CDCES, RDN, other specialists as available and appropriate to treat comorbidities (<code>Table 14.1</code>), daycare or school nurse or other professional, behavioral health professional (as needed), and parent(s) or caregiver(s)
</td>
<td>
Assess for and address social determinants of health and barriers to safety, well-being, and academic performance in school.  
Engage professionals within the school and extracurricular/after-school activities to ensure safe diabetes management. An individualized diabetes medical management plan should be developed in collaboration with school professionals and parent(s) or caregiver(s).  
Support gradual developmentally appropriate transfer of self-management from caregivers to the children and adolescents with diabetes.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Individuals with diabetes and diabetes-related complications or comorbidities</td>
<td>
Specialist referrals as appropriate and available (e.g., behavioral health professional, cardiologist, endocrinologist, eye specialist, gastroenterologist or hepatologist, neurologist, nephrologist, obesity medicine specialist, or podiatrist), care coordinator/navigator or case manager, and clinical pharmacist (for those with polypharmacy or complex medication plans)
</td>
<td>
Screen for functional, cognitive, financial, and logistical barriers to self-management and evidence that self-care demands exceed capacity and available resources and support systems.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Individuals with social and/or structural barriers to care</td>
<td>
Care coordinator/navigator, social services professional, insurance specialist/navigator, peer-to-peer support (as available), community health worker and/or community paramedic (as available), public health professional, and interpreter (as applicable)
</td>
<td>
Consider each person’s psychosocial needs, available resources, and support systems.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Older adults</td>
<td>
Geriatric medicine specialist, clinical pharmacist (for those with polypharmacy or complex medication plans), CDCES and/or RDN with expertise in the care for older adults, social services professional, case manager, community services provider, and physical and/or occupational therapist as available and appropriate based on functional status and independence
</td>
<td>
Consider the older adult’s nutritional status, including ability to afford (financial barriers), acquire (accessibility), prepare (cooking), and consume (oral health) nutritious food.  
Assess for and address needs related to vision, hearing, dexterity, cognition, mobility, and other challenges.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Individuals in long-term care settings</td>
<td>
Long-term care facility clinicians, nurses, other health care professionals, physical and occupational therapists, and RDN
</td>
<td>
Engage professionals within the long-term care facility to ensure safe and appropriate diabetes management.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Pregnant individuals with diabetes</td>
<td>
Maternal-fetal medicine specialist or obstetrician experienced in the care of pregnant individuals with diabetes (particularly for individuals with type 1 diabetes or requiring intensive insulin therapy), CDCES, RDN, eye specialist (particularly for individuals with preexisting type 1 or type 2 diabetes), other specialists as appropriate, and lactation consultant as appropriate
</td>
<td>
Ensure appropriate postpartum follow-up and care, including transition from obstetric care to established primary care.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Individuals with behavioral health conditions</td>
<td>
Behavioral health professional, care coordinator/navigator, and social services professional as age and situation appropriate
</td>
<td>
Use age- and situation-appropriate screening protocols for general and diabetes-related psychosocial concerns.
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

<p>CDCES, certified diabetes care and education specialist; RDN, registered dietitian nutritionist.</p>

2025 December 10 on guest by http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S13/848832/dc26s001.pdf Downloaded from



---



diabetesjournals.org/care     Improving  Care and  Promoting Health  in  Populations  S17

treatment exceeds the capacity of the primary care team to effectively manage, including in the setting of high clinical complexity and multimorbidity and difficult-to-manage hyperglycemia and/or hypoglycemia (28–32).

Initiatives such as the Patient-Centered Medical Home (PCMH) model can improve health outcomes by fostering comprehensive primary care and offering new opportunities for team-based chronic disease management (33–35). Accountable Care Organizations (ACOs), primary care–centered delivery and payment models, can support the implementation of the CCM and ultimately improve diabetes-related metrics in participating organizations (36). The Accountable Health Communities Model was introduced to support identifying and addressing health-related social needs to improve disease management and health outcomes (37); early evidence showed reduction in emergency department use among Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries, but diabetes-specific metrics were not examined, and program effectiveness has been limited by scarcity of resources to meet identified health-related social needs (38). Alternative Payment Models (APMs) have had mixed effects on diabetes care delivery and outcomes, with higher-risk APMs (i.e., models with greater financial risk assumed by the provider, such as capitated payment models) generally associated with greater improvements in diabetes care processes than lower-risk APMs (39). Value-based payment models are hypothesized to better support the implementation and sustainability of innovative care delivery models seeking to improve population health (33,40), though evidence for currently available value-based insurance designs is limited (39).

## Flexible Modalities of Care Delivery: Telehealth and Support for Behavioral Change and Well-being

Telehealth uses digital tools like video conferencing, mobile apps, and remote monitoring to deliver a range of health services remotely, including clinical care, education, and administrative support. Telemedicine, a subset of telehealth, focuses specifically on remote clinical care, supporting diagnosis, treatment, and consultations through real-time communication. Increased access to and effective use of telehealth services, alongside in-person care, can enhance timely access to diabetes care and DSMES services for individuals with diabetes (41–45).

Telehealth should be used to complement and not replace in-person visits for optimal glycemic management (46,47). A growing body of evidence supports the effectiveness of telehealth for glycemic management in people with diabetes. In a 2025 systematic umbrella review of 30 systematic reviews and meta-analyses, 28 reviews analyzed A1C and reported a significant reduction in A1C for people with diabetes (48). In the meta-analytic estimate, 16 of the 30 systematic reviews covering 681 unique trials showed mean reduction in A1C of 0.37% (95% CI −0.41% to −0.32%). Another 2025 systematic review and meta-analysis of 54 randomized controlled trials with people with type 2 diabetes and hypertension found a reduction in A1C of 0.45% (95% CI −0.90% to 0.00%) at 6 months and 0.18% (95% CI −0.41% to −0.05%) at 12 months compared with standard care, and systolic blood pressure was reduced by 5.63 mmHg (95% CI −9.13 to −2.13) at 6 months and 5.59 mmHg (95% CI −10.03 to −1.14) at 12 months compared with standard care (49). For people with type 1 diabetes, a 2023 systematic review and meta-analysis of 22 randomized controlled trials showed a reduction in A1C of 0.26% (95% CI −0.37% to −0.15%) (50). Furthermore, telehealth has been increasingly shown to help rural populations or those with limited physical access to health care in glycemic management as measured by A1C (51–54). In addition, evidence supports the effectiveness of telehealth in hypertension and dyslipidemia interventions (55). Interactive strategies that facilitate communication between health care professionals and people with diabetes, including the use of web-based portals or text messaging and those that incorporate medication adjustment, appear to be effective in improving outcomes (52,56).

Telehealth and other virtual environments can be used to offer diabetes self-management education (DSME), carbohydrate counting instruction, and clinical support while reducing geographic and transportation barriers for individuals living in underresourced areas or with disabilities (57). Telehealth resources can also have a role in improving diabetes management in children and adolescents with type 1 diabetes (58) and addressing SDOH in young adults with diabetes (59). Beyond pediatric populations, telehealth has demonstrated effectiveness in reducing disparities and improving glycemic outcomes in racially and ethnically diverse adults with type 2 diabetes. A systematic review and meta-analysis of nine telehealth randomized controlled trials aimed at improving A1C among Black and Hispanic adults with type 2 diabetes (>50% sample) found a −0.47% (95% CI −0.65% to −0.28%) change in A1C (60). While this systematic review and meta-analysis reported improved glycemic outcomes in marginalized populations, these successes typically depend on substantial investments in infrastructure (laptops, mobile phone access, internet access) and targeted support (digital literacy education, community health workers [CHWs]) that are rarely part of routine care (61). Without this infrastructure and support, attrition is high. Research on technology and inequities highlights that the digital divide is driven by financial (cost of data plans, high-speed internet), informational (numeracy, literacy, digital skills), and technical (interoperability gap, complex user interfaces) barriers (62). Therefore, effective telehealth design must consider accessibility, affordability, connectivity, trust, and contextual tailoring (62). Failure to do so risks exacerbating existing inequities.

Successful diabetes care also requires a systematic approach to supporting the behavior change efforts of people with diabetes. High-quality DSMES has been shown to improve a person’s self-management, satisfaction, and glycemic outcomes (see section 5, “Facilitating Positive Health Behaviors and Well-being to Improve Health Outcomes,” for a detailed review of the evidence supporting DSMES). National DSMES standards call for an integrated approach that includes clinical content and skills, behavioral strategies (goal setting, problem-solving, etc.), and engagement with psychosocial concerns (63). Increasingly, such support is available through online or mobile platforms that can support user access and effectiveness. Findings from a 2025 systematic review and meta-analysis of 43 randomized controlled trials comparing DSME, diabetes self-management support, or DSMES delivered via mHealth interventions versus usual care or attention placebo control showed modest A1C benefits: DSME MD −0.3% (95% CI −0.6% to −0.1%; *P* = 0.002), diabetes self-management support MD −0.4% (95% CI −0.6% to −0.2%;

2025  December
      10 on  guest
                by     http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S13/848832/dc26s001.pdf
                       from   Downloaded



---



Improving Care and Promoting Health in Populations  Diabetes Care Volume 49, Supplement 1, January 2026

P < 0.001), and DSMES MD −0.2% (95% CI −0.3% to −0.0%; P < 0.001) (64). These curricula should be tailored to the needs of their intended populations, including demographic characteristics, diabetes knowledge, emotional support, and cultural beliefs, and address the digital divide, i.e., access to the technology required for implementation (54,65,66).

## Strategies for System-Level Improvement

Optimal diabetes management requires a systematic approach and coordinated team of health care professionals working in an environment where person-centered, high-quality care is a priority (23,67–69). While many diabetes care processes and access to technologies have improved nationally in the past decade, the overall quality of care for people with diabetes remains suboptimal (13). Efforts to increase the quality of diabetes care include providing care that is concordant with evidence-based guidelines (70), expanding the role of teams to implement more intensive disease management strategies (71), tracking medication-taking behavior (70), redesigning care processes (71), implementing electronic health record (EHR) population health tools (72), empowering and educating people with diabetes (73), reducing financial barriers (74), leveraging telehealth to improve access to care (51), assessing and addressing psychosocial issues (63,75), and engaging community resources and public policies that support healthy lifestyles (76). The National Diabetes Education Program maintains an online resource (cdc.gov/diabetes/php/toolkits/index.html) to help health care professionals design and implement more effective health care delivery systems for people with diabetes. Given the pluralistic needs of people with diabetes and the challenges they experience (complex insulin treatment plans, new technologies, changes in capacity for self-management, etc.) vary over the course of disease management and life span, engagement of an interprofessional team with complementary expertise is essential (25). Findings from a systematic review and meta-analysis of 35 team-based care interventions with adults with type 1 or type 2 diabetes showed a −0.5% (95% CI −0.7 to −0.3) change in A1C, −5.5 mmHg (95% CI −8.1 to −3.0) change in systolic blood pressure, −3.2 mmHg (95% CI −4.8 to −1.5) change in diastolic blood pressure, −8.0 mg/dL (95% CI −11.8 to −4.3) change in LDL cholesterol, and −7.4 mg/dL (95% CI −13.9 to −0.9) change in total cholesterol (25). Team-based care has also been shown to reduce atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease (ASCVD) risks. Results from the Center for Integrated and Novel Approaches in Vascular-Metabolic Disease (CINEMA) Program demonstrated improvements in ASCVD risk factors and evidence-based therapies with team-based care for adults with type 2 diabetes or prediabetes via reductions in body weight (−5.5 lb [−2.5 kg]), BMI (−0.9 kg/m²), systolic (−3.6 mmHg) and diastolic (−1.2 mmHg) blood pressure, A1C (−0.5%), LDL (−9.0 mg/dL) and total cholesterol (−10.7 mg/dL), triglycerides (−13.5 mg/dL), and absolute 10-year ASCVD risk (−2.4%) (77).

A systematic review concluded that quality improvement (QI) initiatives can significantly improve outcomes for people with diabetes (24). As mandated by the Affordable Care Act, the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality developed a National Quality Strategy based on three aims: improving the health of populations, improving overall quality and the personal experience of care, and reducing per capita cost (78). QI methods have been documented to improve diabetes device uptake, increase screening for psychosocial needs, and reduce inequities in access to diabetes technologies (79–82). Information and guidance specific to quality improvement and practice transformation for diabetes care are available from the National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases guidance on diabetes care and quality (83).

A successful QI team should include a clinical champion, administrative leader, QI/data specialist, and an individual living with or affected by diabetes. Using patient registries and EHRs, health systems can evaluate the quality of diabetes care being delivered, benchmark metrics, and perform intervention cycles as part of QI strategies (19,72,83). QI can also be used as an effective strategy to support application of clinical practice recommendations by health care professionals.

The ADA recommends that health systems use proven QI methods to translate the Standards of Care recommendations into routine standards of practice.

In addition to QI approaches, other strategies that simultaneously improve the quality of care and potentially reduce costs are gaining momentum and include reimbursement structures that, in contrast to visit-based billing, reward the provision of appropriate and high-quality care to achieve metabolic goals (84), value-based payments, and incentives that accommodate personalized care goals (67,85). Alignment of payment models, health system care delivery models and resource availability, community-based organizations and supports, and regulatory policies is needed to fully support whole-person, comprehensive care for people with diabetes. See **EVIDENCE-BASED CARE DELIVERY AND PAYMENT MODELS TO IMPROVE POPULATION HEALTH**, above, for more information.

## Access to Care

The Affordable Care Act and Medicaid expansion have increased access to care for many individuals with diabetes, emphasizing the protection of people with preexisting conditions, health promotion, and disease prevention (86). In 2024, population-level data for the U.S. civilian noninstitutionalized population included in the National Health Interview Survey (NHIS) showed that just 4.9% of children and adolescents (aged 17 years and younger), 11.1% of adults aged 18–64 years, and 0.6% of adults aged 65 years and older were uninsured (87). People with diabetes who have consistent private or public insurance coverage (i.e., are not uninsured) are more likely to meet quality indicators for diabetes care (86). However, even individuals with insurance coverage can experience financial barriers to care, particularly if enrolled in high-deductible health plans. In 2021, 28% of individuals with employer-sponsored health plans were enrolled in high-deductible health plans (88). Such plans are increasing in popularity; by 2023, 51% of private industry employees had the option to enroll in a high-deductible health plan, although only 36% had access to health savings accounts, which can offset some of the out-of-pocket costs incurred with high-deductible plans (89). Switching to a high-deductible health plan has been shown to increase financial hardship among people with diabetes (90), decrease and delay screening for retinopathy (91), decrease monitoring of blood pressure and A1C (91), and increase the risks of experiencing both acute (severe hypoglycemia, hyperglycemic crises) (92) and chronic (myocardial infarction, stroke, hospitalization for heart

2025 December 10 on guest by http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S13/848832/dc26s001.pdf Downloaded from



---


diabetesjournals.org/care     Improving  Care and  Promoting Health  in  Populations  S19

failure, kidney failure, lower-extremity complications, proliferative retinopathy, and blindness) (93) diabetes complications. However, health plan adoption of preventive drug lists that reduce or eliminate out-of-pocket cost sharing for a wide range of medications used to treat chronic conditions like diabetes reduces out-of-pocket expenditures for people with diabetes and narrows gaps in diabetes care (94). Insurance coverage and formulary design influence treatment decisions; it is essential that payors cover evidence-based diabetes care with minimal cost sharing by people with diabetes. Health care teams should also discuss insurance coverage and financial barriers to care with all individuals with diabetes and pursue therapeutic strategies that minimize financial hardship (74).

Access to primary and specialty care is essential for people with diabetes. While most adults with diabetes have access to a primary care clinician—a 2016 nationally representative population-based study found that 88% of adults with diabetes saw a primary care clinician in the prior year (95)—fewer have access to specialty endocrinology/diabetes care (96). A study of Medicare beneficiaries found that just 33% of older adults with type 1 diabetes, 14% of adults with type 2 diabetes and history of severe hypoglycemia, and 9% of other adults with type 2 diabetes saw an endocrinologist in 2019 (96). Racial and ethnic minoritized individuals, those with low income, those living in rural areas, and those residing in a long-term care facility were less likely to receive endocrinology care. Improving health outcomes for people with diabetes will therefore require improving availability of and access to primary and specialty services, and interdisciplinary care from the full diabetes care team, to meet the full range of their health care needs (Table 1.1).

## Cost Considerations

The cost of diabetes medications and devices is an ongoing barrier to achieving glycemic goals and preventing diabetes complications. Medication underuse due to cost has been termed “cost-related medication nonadherence” (here referred to as cost-related barriers to medication use). Based on a national survey conducted in 2021, 18.6% of U.S. adults with type 1 diabetes and 15.8% of adults with insulin-treated type 2 diabetes reported rationing (i.e., skipping, taking less, and/or delaying) their insulin to save money (97). The ADA Insulin Access and Affordability Working Group has recommended system-level approaches to address this issue, including concepts such as cost-sharing for insured people with diabetes based on the lowest price available, a list price for insulins that closely reflects the net price, and health plans that ensure people with diabetes can access insulin without undue administrative burden or excessive cost (98). In 2021, the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) launched the Part D Senior Savings Model (99), which required capped monthly out-of-pocket payments for covered insulins at $35 per insulin per month. In 2022, 43% of standalone Part D plan enrollees and 60% of Medicare Advantage Part D plan enrollees participated in the Senior Savings Model (99). Most recently, the Inflation Reduction Act of 2022 capped out-of-pocket payments for insulin at $35 per insulin per month for all Medicare beneficiaries. A patchwork of solutions has also been introduced for individuals with commercial insurance and those without health insurance. Over the past 5 years, 25 states and the District of Columbia have capped out-of-pocket expenditures for insulin in select state-regulated commercial health plans (100), which has resulted in modest decreases in insulin out-of-pocket spending for eligible enrollees (101). Between 2023 and 2024, three major insulin manufacturers similarly lowered the price of insulin to $35 per month in select circumstances (102). These programs may help reduce the financial hardship of diabetes management, though many are challenging to navigate, not all people with diabetes can benefit, and costs for insulin delivery and glucose monitoring remain high. Thus, all people with diabetes should be screened for financial hardship of treatment, cost-related barriers to medication use, and rationing of other essential services due to medical costs (103).

The cost of medications (not only insulin) influences prescribing patterns and medication use because of the financial strain on the person with diabetes and the lack of secondary payor support (public and private insurance) for effective approved glucose-lowering, cardiovascular and kidney disease risk–reducing, and obesity management therapies. There is robust evidence of gaps in the use of evidence-based therapies among individuals from racial and ethnic minoritized backgrounds, those with lower income levels, those living in rural areas, and those with limited insurance coverage (11,104–112). Identifying and addressing financial barriers should be a focus of treatment goals and clinical decisions (104). (See TAILORING TREATMENT FOR SOCIAL CONTEXT.)

## TAILORING TREATMENT FOR SOCIAL CONTEXT

> **Recommendations**  
> **1.6** Health systems should assess and address gaps in diabetes care and health outcomes (e.g., by stratifying clinical quality data by factors such as insurance status, race, ethnicity, preferred language for health care discussions, disability, and social determinants of health). **B**  
> **1.7** During clinical encounters, assess for social determinants of health, including food insecurity, **A** housing insecurity, financial barriers, health insurance and health care access, environmental and neighborhood factors, and social capital/social community support, **B** to inform treatment decisions, with referral to appropriate local community resources.  
> **1.8** Provide people with diabetes additional self-management support from lay health coaches, navigators, or community health workers when available. **A** Digital self-management tools or coaches may be considered as appropriate. **B**  
> **1.9** Consider the involvement of community health workers to support management of diabetes and cardiovascular and kidney risk factors, especially in underserved communities and health care systems. **B**

Health inequities related to diabetes and its complications are well documented, are heavily influenced by SDOH, and have been associated with greater risk for developing diabetes, higher disease prevalence, and worse diabetes-related outcomes (4). Greater exposure to adverse SDOH over the life course results in poor health (113). Interventions to address SDOH can improve diabetes-related outcomes (114,115). Using clinical quality data to identify inequities



---

S20   Improving Care and Promoting Health  in  Populations     Diabetes Care Volume  49,  Supplement  1,  January  2026

and  opportunities  for  improvement  is              disparities  in  populations  is  yet  to  be  for-     quality  or  health  outcomes  in  people  with
valuable  for  health  care  professionals,           mally  studied,  general  recommendations               diabetes (116,128).
health  systems,  payors,  policymakers,  and         from  other  chronic  disease  management               A population in which such issues must
people with diabetes (116). The Joint Com-            and  prevention  models  can  be  drawn                 be  particularly  considered  is  older adults,
mission  requires that all accredited organi-         upon  to  inform  system-level  strategies  in          for  whom  social  difficulties  may  further
zations  in  its  ambulatory  health  care,           diabetes  (62).  For  example,  the  National           impair  quality  of  life  and  increase  the
behavioral health care and human services,            Academy  of  Medicine  has  published  a                risk of functional dependency (129) (see
critical access hospital, and hospital accredi-       framework  for  educating  health  care                 section 13, “Older Adults,” for a detailed
tation programs collect race and ethnicity            professionals  on  the  importance  of                  discussion  of  social  considerations  in
information and implement specific steps              SDOH  (123).  Furthermore,  there  are  re-             older adults).
to reduce health care disparities. The Joint          sources available for the inclusion of stan-            Creating  system-level  mechanisms  to
Commission  specifically  requires  that  or-         dardized  sociodemographic  variables  in               screen  for  SDOH  may  help  overcome
ganizations designate an individual or in-            EHRs to facilitate the assessment of health             structural  barriers  and  communication
dividuals to lead efforts to reduce health            disparities  and  the  impact  of  interven-            gaps  between  people  with  diabetes  and
care disparities,  assess  health-related so-         tions  designed  to  reduce  those  dispar-             health  care  professionals  (126,130).  A
cial  needs  and  provide  information  on            ities (78,124,125).                                     number of studies have proven the effec-
community resources to meet these needs,              SDOH  are  not  consistently  recognized                tiveness of identifying SDOH by using vali-
identify health care disparities by stratifying       and  often  go  undiscussed—and  are  ulti-             dated  screening  tools  (131).  In  addition,
quality  and  safety  data  using  sociodemo-         mately not addressed—during clinical en-                brief,  validated  screening  tools  for  some
graphic  characteristics,  develop  an  action        counters (126).  Even  financial  barriers to           SDOH exist and could facilitate discussion
plan  to  address  health  care  disparities,         care and health, which directly affect the              around  factors  that  significantly  impact
work  to  actively  reduce  health  care  dis-        ability  to  implement  prescribed  care                treatment during clinical encounters.
parities,  and  inform  key  stakeholders             plans,  are rarely discussed.  Among  peo-
about progress to reduce health care dis-             ple  with  chronic  illnesses,  two-thirds  of          Food Insecurity
parities  (117).  The  CMS  Framework  for            those  who  reported  not  taking  medica-              Food  insecurity  is  a household-level  eco-
Health  Equity  similarly  prioritizes  collec-       tions  as  prescribed  due  to  cost-related            nomic  and  social  condition  of  limited  or
tion, reporting, and analysis of standardized         barriers  never  shared  this  information              uncertain access to adequate food (132).
individual-level demographic (including race,         with their physician (123). A study using               In  2022,  almost  13%  of  Americans  were
ethnicity, language, gender identity, sex, sex-       data  from  the  NHIS  found  that  half  of            food insecure (132), and food insecurity is
ual  orientation,  and  disability  status)  and      adults  with  diabetes  reported  financial             associated  with  increased  risk  of  type  2
SDOH data as well as assessing for and ad-            stress  and  about  20%  reported  food  in-            diabetes  and  higher-than-recommended
dressing disparities through improved access          security (126). Studies of both type 1 dia-             glycemia (133–135). The rate is dispropor-
to  culturally  tailored  services,  team-based       betes and type 2 diabetes have noted an                 tionately higher among some groups that
care, and community resources (118). Qual-            association  of  one  or  more  adverse                 have  been  historically  marginalized,  low-
ity measures assessing SDOH screening and             SDOH  with  health  care  utilization  and              income households, and households headed
intervention  have  been  introduced  by  the         poor diabetes outcomes among individ-                   by  single  mothers.  Additionally,  those  fac-
National  Committee  for  Quality  Assurance          uals with diabetes (123,127). It is there-              ing food insecurity have lower engagement
(focused on food, housing, and transporta-            fore important for people with diabetes to              in self-care behaviors and medication use,
tion insecurity) (113) and CMS (focused on            be  screened  for  SDOH  during  clinical  en-          have higher rates of depression and diabe-
food, housing, and transportation insecu-             counters  and  be  referred  to  appropriate            tes distress, and have worse glycemic man-
rity,  utility  difficulties,  and  interpersonal     clinical  and  community  resources  to  ad-            agement  compared  with  individuals  who
safety) (119).                                        dress these needs (Table 1.1). Furthermore,             are  food  secure  (133,134).  Older  adults
Other than the SDOH, there are many                   health systems may benefit from compiling               with food insecurity are more likely to have
contributors  to  inequities,  including  im-         an inventory of local resources to facilitate           emergency department visits and hospital-
plicit and explicit bias, discriminatory poli-        referrals at the point of care, augmenting              izations  compared  with  older  adults  who
cies and procedures, institutional practices,         as  necessary  existing  tools  such  as  find-         do  not  report  food  insecurity  (136).  The
and  both  current  and  historical  structural       help.org, Unite Us, 211 (United Way), and               risk  for  food  insecurity  can  be  assessed
factors  that  affect  health  and  well-being
for individuals and communities (120–122).            others. Policies and payment models that                with a validated two-item screening tool
The  ADA  recognizes  the  association  be-           support  addressing  SDOH,  both  within                that  includes  the  following  statements:
tween  interpersonal,  social,  economic,  and        and  outside  the  health  care  setting,  are          1) “Within the past 12 months, we worried
environmental factors and the prevention              needed  to  ensure  that  these  efforts  are           whether our food would run out before we
and treatment of diabetes and has issued              both feasible and sustainable. One exam-                got  money  to  buy  more”  and 2)  “Within
a call for research that seeks to better un-          ple  of  a  statewide  payment  model  that             the  past 12  months the  food  we  bought
derstand how social determinants influence            incentivizes value-based care, addressing               just didn’t last, and we didn’t have money
behaviors  and  how  the  relationships  be-          SDOH and funding community-based health                 to get more” (137). Interventions such as
tween  these  variables  can  be  modified  for       care  professionals,  is  the  Maryland  Total          food  prescription  programs  are  consid-
enhancing the prevention and management               Cost of Care Model, although it is currently            ered promising to address food insecurity
of  diabetes  (114).  While  a  comprehensive         limited by a narrow focus on preventing di-             by  integrating  community  resources  into
strategy to reduce diabetes-related health            abetes and does not consider diabetes care              primary care settings and directly dealing

2025  December
      10 on  guest
                by     http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S13/848832/dc26s001.pdf
                       from   Downloaded

---


diabetesjournals.org/care     Improving  Care and  Promoting Health  in  Populations  S21

with food deserts in underserved communities (135).

In those with diabetes and food insecurity, the priority is mitigating the increased risk for severe hyperglycemia and hypoglycemia (138,139). The reasons for the increased risk of hyperglycemia can include the consumption of inexpensive carbohydraterich processed foods, binge eating, financial constraints to filling diabetes medication prescriptions, anxiety and depression, and poor sleep, all contributing to hyperglycemia and poor diabetes self-care behaviors. Hypoglycemia can occur as a result of inadequate or inconsistent carbohydrate consumption following the administration of a sulfonylurea or insulin. Health care professionals should consider these factors when making treatment decisions for people with food insecurity and seek local resources to help people with diabetes and their family members obtain appropriate food more regularly (140).

### Housing Insecurity
Housing insecurity has been shown to be directly associated with a person’s ability to maintain appropriate diabetes self-management (141). Housing insecurity often coexists with other barriers that challenge diabetes self-management. Food insecurity, lack of health insurance, cognitive impairment, behavioral health concerns, and low literacy and numeracy skills are also factors (140). The prevalence of diabetes among people experiencing housing insecurity is estimated to be around 8% in the U.S. (142). Additionally, people with diabetes and housing insecurity need secure places to keep their diabetes medications and supplies as well as refrigerator access to safely store insulin. The risk for housing insecurity can be ascertained using a brief risk assessment tool developed and validated for use among veterans (143). Given the potential challenges, health care professionals who care for housing-insecure individuals should be familiar with resources to support these individuals or have access to social workers who can facilitate stable housing as a way to improve diabetes care (144).

### Refugee Populations and Migrant and Seasonal Agricultural Workers
Refugee status, like having a diabetes diagnosis, is an independent risk factor for cardiovascular disease (145). In areas experiencing humanitarian crises, refugees are at greater risk for obstacles to optimal chronic disease management, but unfortunately there are few quality investigations into diabetes care and its outcomes among refugees. There have been efforts to develop models of care specifically aimed at improving the health of refugee populations, but more work is needed to demonstrate effectiveness of those care models and approaches (146).

Migrant and seasonal agricultural workers likely have a higher risk of type 2 diabetes than the general population. While migrant farmworker–specific data are lacking, most agricultural workers in the U.S. are Latino, a population with a high rate of type 2 diabetes. In addition, living in severe poverty brings with it food insecurity, high chronic stress, and an increased risk of diabetes; there is also an association between the exposure to certain pesticides and the incidence of diabetes (147).

Data from the Department of Labor indicate that there are approximately 2.18 million agricultural workers in the U.S. (148). These agricultural workers often travel throughout the country seasonally (149). In 2022, 175 health centers across the U.S. reported providing care to 843,071 adult migrant farmworkers, and 91,839 had encounters for diabetes (147). In a 2023 report on the National Agricultural Workers Survey, age-adjusted self-reported diabetes prevalence was 13.51% (95% CI 10.0–17.1) among migrant farmworkers and 10.8% (95% CI 9.0–12.6) among nonmigrant farmworkers (147).

Migrant farmworkers and other agricultural workers encounter numerous and overlapping barriers to receiving care. Migration, which might occur as frequently as every few weeks for some, disrupts care. Common barriers to adequate diabetes care include those related to cost, culture, language, literacy, transportation, geographic distance, food access, long work hours, unfamiliarity with new communities, the complexity of the U.S. health care system, and limited access to various other resources like medications and DSMES (149). Without regular care, farmworkers with diabetes can experience severe and often expensive complications that incur morbidity and mortality and affect quality of life. Nontraditional care delivery models, including mobile integrated health and telehealth, should be leveraged to improve access to care.

Health care professionals need to be attuned to the working and living conditions of people with diabetes. For example, if a farmworker with diabetes presents for care, appropriate referrals should be initiated to social workers and community resources, as available, to assist with removing barriers to care.

### Language Barriers
Health systems and health care professionals caring for those with limited English proficiency should develop or offer educational programs and materials in culturally appropriate languages. Professional language assistance (i.e., interpreters) should be provided to individuals with limited English proficiency and/or other communication needs at no cost to them (150). Use of untrained interpreters, including family members, should be avoided when possible, as this can result in confusing or inaccurate conveyance of information. Accompanying written materials should be in the language appropriate for the individual being supported and at a reading level that is not overly complicated—typically this is defined as a sixth-grade reading level. Numerous medical translation tools are available and show promise in addressing language barriers, although further research is needed to establish their efficacy in diabetes care (151).

The National Standards for Culturally and Linguistically Appropriate Services in Health and Health Care (National CLAS Standards) provide guidance on how health care professionals can reduce language barriers by improving their cultural competency, addressing health literacy, and ensuring communication with professional language assistance (150). In addition, the National CLAS Standards website offers several resources and materials that can be used to improve the quality of care delivery to individuals with limited English proficiency.

### Health Literacy and Numeracy
Health literacy is the degree to which individuals can obtain, process, and understand basic health information and services needed to make appropriate decisions (152,153). Health literacy is strongly associated with individuals engaging in complex disease management and self-care (154). Approximately 9 out of 10 American adults are estimated to have limited or low health literacy (152,155). Health care professionals and diabetes care and education specialists should provide easy-to-understand

2025  December 10 on guest by http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S13/848832/dc26s001.pdf Downloaded from


---

S22   Improving Care and Promoting Health  in  Populations     Diabetes Care Volume  49,  Supplement  1,  January  2026

information and reduce unnecessary com-             and  physical  activity  into  practice              that are discussed in the Standards of Care
plexity  when  developing  care  plans.  Inter-     through  health  care  community  link-              with  the  goal  of  improving  health,  elimi-
ventions  addressing  low  health  literacy  in     ages  and  community-based  care  delivery           nating health disparities, and reducing the
populations with diabetes demonstrate im-           (162). CHWs (160), community paramedics              impact  of  diabetes  and  its  complications
provements  in  A1C,  diabetes  knowledge,          (163,164), peer supporters (162,165), and            on individuals and society.
and  self-management  behaviors  (156).             lay leaders (166) may assist in the delivery
However, more research is needed to es-             of  DSMES  services  (124,167),  particularly        References
tablish the most effective strategies for en-       in  underserved  communities.  The  Ameri-           1.  Silberberg M, Martinez-Bianchi V, Lyn MJ. What
hancing  retention  and     application  of         can  Public  Health  Association  defines  a         is population health? Prim Care 2019;46:475–484
diabetes knowledge among various popu-              CHW  as  a  “frontline  public  health  worker       2.  Bodenheimer  T,  Sinsky  C.  From  triple  to
                                                                                                         quadruple aim: care of the patient requires care
lations of people with diabetes (154,157).          who is a trusted member of and/or has an             of the provider. Ann Fam Med 2014;12:573–576
Health  numeracy  is  also  essential  in           unusually close understanding of the com-            3.  Institute  of  Medicine  (US)  Committee  on
diabetes  prevention  and  management.              munity  served”  (168).  CHWs  can  be  part         Quality  of  Health  Care  in  America. Crossing  the
Health  numeracy  requires  primary  nu-            of an evidence-based strategy to improve             Quality Chasm: A New Health System for the 21st
meric skills, applied health numeracy, and          the  management  of  diabetes  and  cardio-          Century. Washington,  DC,  National  Academies
                                                                                                         Press, 2001
interpretive health numeracy, which is es-          vascular  risk  factors  in  underserved  com-       4.  Hill-Briggs  F,  Adler  NE,  Berkowitz  SA,  et  al.
pecially important for people using diabe-          munities  and  health  care  systems  (169).         Social  determinants  of  health  and  diabetes:  a
tes technologies like insulin pumps (158).          The  CHW scope  of  practice  in  areas  such        scientific review. Diabetes Care 2020;44:258–279
People with prediabetes or diabetes often           as  outreach  and  communication,  advo-             5.  Haire-Joshu D, Hill-Briggs F. The next generation
                                                                                                         of  diabetes  translation:  a  path  to  health  equity.
need  to  perform  numeric  tasks,  such  as        cacy,  social  support,  basic  health  educa-       Annu Rev Public Health 2019;40:391–410
interpreting  glucose  readings,  decoding          tion,  referrals  to  community  clinics,  and       6.  Centers  for  Disease  Control  and  Prevention.
food  labels,  and  understanding  medica-          other  services  has  successfully  provided         National  Diabetes  Statistics  Report.  Accessed  4
tion  doses,  timings,  and  refills,  to  make     social  and  primary  preventive  services  to       August  2025.  Available  from https://www.cdc
treatment decisions. Thus, both health lit-         underserved populations in rural and hard-           .gov/diabetes/php/data-research/index.html
                                                                                                         7.  Centers  for  Disease  Control  and  Prevention.
eracy and numeracy are necessary for en-            to-reach communities.  Even though  CHWs’            Adult  Obesity  Facts.  Accessed  4  August  2025.
abling  effective  communication  between           core competencies are not clinical in nature,        Available from https://www.cdc.gov/obesity/adult-
people with diabetes and health care pro-           in some circumstances, clinicians may dele-          obesity-facts/index.html
fessionals,  arriving  at  a  treatment  plan,      gate limited clinical tasks to CHWs. If such is      8.         Lawrence JM, Divers J, Isom S, et al.; SEARCH
                                                                                                         for  Diabetes  in  Youth  Study  Group.  Trends  in
and  making  diabetes  self-management              the  case,  these  tasks  must  always  be  per-     prevalence  of  type  1  and  type  2  diabetes  in
task decisions. If people with diabetes ap-         formed under the direct supervision of the           children  and  adolescents  in  the  US,  2001–2017.
pear  not  to  understand  concepts  associ-        delegating  health  professional  and  follow-       JAMA 2021;326:717–727
ated  with  treatment  decisions,  both  can        ing  state  health  care  laws  and  statutes        9.  Centers  for  Disease  Control  and  Prevention.
be assessed using standardized screening            (170,171). Community paramedics are ad-              Childhood  Obesity  Facts.  Accessed  4  August
                                                                                                         2025.  Available  from https://www.cdc.gov/
measures (159). Adjunctive education and            vanced paramedics with training in chronic           obesity/childhood-obesity-facts/childhood-obesity-
support may be indicated if limited health          disease monitoring and education, medica-            facts.html
literacy and numeracy are barriers to opti-         tion  management,  care  coordination,  and          10.       Saelee  R, Bullard KM,  Hora IA, et al. Trends
mal care decisions (75).                            SDOH in addition to their emergency medi-            and inequalities in diabetes-related complications
                                                    cal services expertise. While their scope of         among  U.S.  Adults,  2000–2020.  Diabetes  Care
                                                                                                         2025;48:18–28
Social and Community Support                        practice  varies  across  states,  community         11. Ebekozien O, Mungmode A, Sanchez J, et al.
Social support, which comprises commu-              paramedics  can  engage  and  support  peo-          Longitudinal  trends  in  glycemic  outcomes  and
nity  and  personal  network  instrumental          ple living with diabetes under the direction         technology use for over 48,000 people with type 1
support, promotes better health, whereas            of a medical director by delivering diabetes         diabetes  (2016-2022)  from  the  T1D  Exchange
                                                                                                         Quality  Improvement  Collaborative.  Diabetes
lack  of  social  support  is  associated  with     education, assisting with medication man-            Technol Ther 2023;25:765–773
poorer  health  outcomes  in  individuals           agement,  performing  health  assessments            12.        Fang M, Wang D, Coresh J, Selvin E. Trends in
with diabetes (114). Of particular concern          and  wound  care,  and  connecting  people           diabetes  treatment  and  control  in  U.S.  adults,
are  the  SDOH,  including,  among  others,         with diabetes and care partners with clini-          1999–2018. N Engl J Med 2021;384:2219–2228
                                                    cal and community resources (163,164).               13. Nassereldine  H,  Li  Z,  Compton  K,  et  al. The
racism  and  discrimination  (160).  These                                                               burden of diabetes mortality by county, race, and
factors  are  rarely  addressed  in  routine                                                             ethnicity  in  the  U.S.,  2000–2019.  Diabetes  Care
clinical practice but may be drivers of ad-         SUMMARY                                              2025;48:546–555
verse health outcomes and lower engage-             Improving individual and population health           14. Chiang  JL,  Maahs  DM,  Garvey  KC,  et  al.
                                                                                                         Type  1  diabetes  in  children  and  adolescents:  a
ment in beneficial self-care behaviors and          for people with and at risk for diabetes re-         position  statement  by  the  American  Diabetes
medication use. Identifying and leveraging          quires  engagement  of  and  collaboration           Association. Diabetes Care 2018;41:2026–2044
community resources are core components             between  people  with  diabetes  and  their          15.          Malik FS, Sauder KA, Isom S, et al.; SEARCH
of chronic care management (21,161).                caregivers,  interprofessional  health  care         for  Diabetes  in  Youth  Study. Trends  in  glycemic
                                                                                                         control  among  youth  and  young  adults  with
Various  organizations,  including  the             teams, health systems, community partners,           diabetes: the SEARCH for Diabetes in Youth Study.
American  Medical  Association  and  the            payors,  policymakers,  and  public  health          Diabetes Care 2022;45:285–294
Agency for Healthcare Research and Qual-            agencies.  This  section  provides  guidance         16. Foster NC, Beck RW, Miller KM, et al. State of
ity, among others, promote the translation          to facilitate implementation of evidence-            type 1 diabetes management and outcomes from
                                                                                                         the T1D Exchange in 2016–2018. Diabetes Technol
of  clinical  recommendations  for  nutrition       based  diabetes  care  recommendations               Ther 2019;21:66–72

2025  December
      10 on  guest
                by     http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S13/848832/dc26s001.pdf
                       from   Downloaded

---



diabetesjournals.org/care     Improving  Care and  Promoting Health  in  Populations  S23

17. Parker ED, Lin J, Mahoney T, et al. Economic costs of diabetes in the U.S. in 2022. Diabetes Care 2024;47:26–43  
18. Patel MR, Zhang G, Heisler M, et al. Measurement and validation of the Comprehensive Score for Financial Toxicity (COST) in a population with diabetes. Diabetes Care 2022;45:2535–2543  
19. Prahalad P, Hardison H, Odugbesan O, et al.; T1D Exchange Quality Improvement Collaborative. Benchmarking diabetes technology use among 21 U.S. pediatric diabetes centers. Clin Diabetes 2024; 42:27–33  
20. Chehal PK, Selvin E, DeVoe JE, Mangione CM, Ali MK. Diabetes and the fragmented state of US health care and policy. Health Aff (Millwood) 2022;41:939–946  
21. Stellefson M, Dipnarine K, Stopka C. The chronic care model and diabetes management in US primary care settings: a systematic review. Prev Chronic Dis 2013;10:E26  
22. Goh LH, Siah CJR, Tam WWS, Tai ES, Young DYL. Effectiveness of the chronic care model for adults with type 2 diabetes in primary care: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Syst Rev 2022;11:273  
23. Tricco AC, Ivers NM, Grimshaw JM, et al. Effectiveness of quality improvement strategies on the management of diabetes: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Lancet 2012;379:2252–2261  
24. Konnyu KJ, Yogasingam S, Lépine J, et al. Quality improvement strategies for diabetes care: effects on outcomes for adults living with diabetes. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2023;5:CD014513  
25. Levengood TW, Peng Y, Xiong KZ, et al.; Community Preventive Services Task Force. Team-based care to improve diabetes management: a community guide meta-analysis. Am J Prev Med 2019;57:e17–e26  
26. Lee JK, McCutcheon LRM, Fazel MT, Cooley JH, Slack MK. Assessment of interprofessional collaborative practices and outcomes in adults with diabetes and hypertension in primary care: a systematic review and meta-analysis. JAMA Netw Open 2021;4:e2036725  
27. Oshman L, Bhomia N, Diez HL, et al. The Michigan Collaborative for Type 2 Diabetes (MCT2D): development and implementation of a statewide collaborative quality initiative. BMC Health Serv Res 2024;24:1254  
28. Avnat E, Chodick G, Shalev V. Identifying profiles of patients with uncontrolled type 2 diabetes who would benefit from referral to an endocrinologist. Endocr Pract 2023;29:855–861  
29. Setji TL, Page C, Pagidipati N, Goldstein BA. Differences in achieving Hba1c goals among patients seen by endocrinologists and primary care providers. Endocr Pract 2019;25:461–469  
30. McCoy RG, Vandergrift JL, Gray B. Patient and physician factors driving the gaps in use of drugs with cardiovascular and kidney benefits by Medicare beneficiaries with type 2 diabetes treated by endocrinologists, nephrologists, and cardiologists: population-based cohort study. Diabetes Res Clin Pract 2025;221:112039  
31. Phan T-L, Hossain J, Lawless S, Werk LN. Quarterly visits with glycated hemoglobin monitoring: the sweet spot for glycemic control in youth with type 1 diabetes. Diabetes Care 2014;37:341–345  

32. Booth GL, Shah BR, Austin PC, Hux JE, Luo J, Lok CE. Early specialist care for diabetes: who benefits most? A propensity score-matched cohort study. Diabet Med 2016;33:111–118  
33. Adler-Milstein J, Linden A, Hollingsworth JM, Ryan AM. Association of primary care engagement in value-based reform programs with health services outcomes: participation and synergies. JAMA Health Forum 2022;3:e220005  
34. Bojadzievski T, Gabbay RA. Patient-centered medical home and diabetes. Diabetes Care 2011;34:1047–1053  
35. McManus LS, Dominguez-Cancino KA, Stanek MK, et al. The patient-centered medical home as an intervention strategy for diabetes mellitus: a systematic review of the literature. Curr Diabetes Rev 2021;17:317–331  
36. Fraze TK, Lewis VA, Tierney E, Colla CH. Quality of care improves for patients with diabetes in Medicare shared savings accountable care organizations: organizational characteristics associated with performance. Popul Health Manag 2018;21:401–408  
37. Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services. Accountable Health Communities Model. Accessed 8 August 2025. Available from https://www.cms.gov/priorities/innovation/innovation-models/ahcm  
38. Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services. Accountable Health Communities (AHC) Model Evaluation. Second Evaluation Report Accessed 8 August 2025. Available from https://www.cms.gov/priorities/innovation/data-and-reports/2023/ahc-second-eval-rpt  
39. Wang S, Weyer G, Duru OK, Gabbay RA, Huang ES. Can alternative payment models and value-based insurance design alter the course of diabetes in the United States? Health Aff (Millwood) 2022;41:980–984  
40. Gunter KE, Peek ME, Tanumihardjo JP, et al. Population health innovations and payment to address social needs among patients and communities with diabetes. Milbank Q 2021;99:928–973  
41. Katula JA, Dressler EV, Kittel CA, et al. Effects of a digital diabetes prevention program: an RCT. Am J Prev Med 2022;62:567–577  
42. Eberle C, Stichling S. Clinical improvements by telemedicine interventions managing type 1 and type 2 diabetes: systematic meta-review. J Med Internet Res 2021;23:e23244  
43. American Telemedicine Association. Telehealth: defining 21st Century Care. Accessed 8 August 2025. Available from https://www.americantelemed.org/resource/why-telemedicine/  
44. Health IT. Telehealth StartUp and Resource Guide Version 1.1. Accessed 8 August 2025. Available from https://www.healthit.gov/sites/default/files/telehealthguide_final_0.pdf  
45. American Medical Association. AMA Telehealth Quick Guide. Accessed 8 August 2025. Available from https://www.ama-assn.org/practice-management/digital/ama-telehealth-quick-guide  
46. Zupa MF, Vimalananda VG, Rothenberger SD, et al. Patterns of telemedicine use and glycemic outcomes of endocrinology care for patients with type 2 diabetes. JAMA Netw Open 2023;6:e2346305  
47. Mullur RS, Hsiao JS, Mueller K. Telemedicine in diabetes care. Am Fam Physician 2022;105:281–288  
48. Ravi S, Meyerowitz-Katz G, Yung C, et al. Effect of virtual care in type 2 diabetes management—a systematic umbrella review of systematic reviews and meta-analysis. BMC Health Serv Res 2025;25:348  
49. Mihevc M, Virtič Potočnik T, Zavrnik Č, Klemenc-Ketiš Z, Poplas Susič A, Petek Šter M. Managing cardiovascular risk factors with telemedicine in primary care: a systematic review and meta-analysis of patients with arterial hypertension and type 2 diabetes. Chronic Illn 2025;21:3–24  
50. Udsen FW, Hangaard S, Bender C, et al. The effectiveness of telemedicine solutions in type 1 diabetes management: a systematic review and meta-analysis. J Diabetes Sci Technol 2023;17:782–793  
51. Kobe EA, Lewinski AA, Jeffreys AS, et al. Implementation of an intensive telehealth intervention for rural patients with clinic-refractory diabetes. J Gen Intern Med 2022;37:3080–3088  
52. Heitkemper EM, Mamykina L, Travers J, Smaldone A. Do health information technology self-management interventions improve glycemic control in medically underserved adults with diabetes? A systematic review and meta-analysis. J Am Med Inform Assoc 2017;24:1024–1035  
53. Jarvandi S, Roberson P, Greig J, Upendram S, Grion J. Effectiveness of diabetes education interventions in rural America: a systematic review. Health Educ Res 2023;38:286–305  
54. Moschonis G, Siopis G, Jung J, et al.; DigiCare4You Consortium. Effectiveness, reach, uptake, and feasibility of digital health interventions for adults with type 2 diabetes: a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials. Lancet Digit Health 2023;5:e125–e143  
55. Timpel P, Oswald S, Schwarz PEH, Harst L. Mapping the evidence on the effectiveness of telemedicine interventions in diabetes, dyslipidemia, and hypertension: an umbrella review of systematic reviews and meta-analyses. J Med Internet Res 2020;22:e16791  
56. Faruque LI, Wiebe N, Ehteshami-Afshar A, et al.; Alberta Kidney Disease Network. Effect of telemedicine on glycated hemoglobin in diabetes: a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized trials. CMAJ 2017;189:E341–E364  
57. Li Y, Yang Y, Liu X, Zhang X, Li F. Effectiveness of telemedicine-delivered carbohydrate-counting interventions in patients with type 1 diabetes: systematic review and meta-analysis. J Med Internet Res 2025;27:e59579  
58. Zhang K, Huang Q, Wang Q, et al. Telemedicine in improving glycemic control among children and adolescents with type 1 diabetes mellitus: systematic review and meta-analysis. J Med Internet Res 2024;26:e51538  
59. Garcia JF, Fogel J, Reid M, Bisno DI, Raymond JK. Telehealth for young adults with diabetes: addressing social determinants of health. Diabetes Spectr 2021;34:357–362  
60. Anderson A, O’Connell SS, Thomas C, Chimmanamada R. Telehealth interventions to improve diabetes management among Black and Hispanic patients: a systematic review and meta-analysis. J Racial Ethn Health Disparities 2022;9:2375–2386  
61. Mayberry LS, Lyles CR, Oldenburg B, Osborn CY, Parks M, Peek ME. mHealth interventions for disadvantaged and vulnerable people with type 2 diabetes. Curr Diab Rep 2019;19:148  
62. Ebekozien O, Fantasia K, Farrokhi F, Sabharwal A, Kerr D. Technology and health inequities in

2025  December  
10 on guest by http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S13/848832/dc26s001.pdf Downloaded from  



---

S24   Improving Care and Promoting Health  in  Populations     Diabetes Care Volume  49,  Supplement  1,  January  2026

diabetes  care:  how  do  we  widen  access  to                     patient-centered,  team-based  intervention  for             Available from https://www.bls.gov/ebs/factsheets/
underserved populations  and  utilize  technology                   patients  with  type  2  diabetes  or  prediabetes  at       high-deductible-health-plans-and-health-savings-
to improve outcomes for all? Diabetes Obes Metab                    high cardiovascular risk. Am J Prev Cardiol 2024;            accounts.htm
2024;26(Suppl. 1):3–13                                              17:100630                                                    91.         Garabedian LF,  Zhang F, LeCates R, Wallace
63.        Davis J, Fischl AH, Beck J, et al. 2022 National         78.         Kahkoska  AR,  Busby-Whitehead  J,  Jonsson      J,  Ross-Degnan  D,  Wharam  JF.  Trends  in  high
Standards for Diabetes Self-Management Education                    Funk M, et al. Receipt of diabetes specialty care            deductible  health  plan  enrolment  and  spending
and Support. Diabetes Care 2022;45:484–494                          and  management  services  by  older  adults  with           among commercially insured members with and
64. Versluis    A,   Boels  AM,  Huijden               MCG,         diabetes  in  the  U.S.,  2015–2019:  an  analysis  of       without chronic conditions: a Natural Experiment
Mijnsbergen MD, Rutten GEHM, Vos RC. Diabetes                       Medicare  fee-for-service  claims.  Diabetes  Care           for Translation in Diabetes (NEXT-D2) study. BMJ
self-management education and support delivered                     2024;47:1181–1185                                            Open 2021;11:e044198
by  mobile  health  (mHealth)  interventions  for                   79.         Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality.      92.  Wu  YM,  Huang  J,  Reed  ME.  Association
adults with type 2 diabetes—a systematic review                     About  the  National  Quality  Strategy.  Accessed           between  high-deductible  health  plans  and
and meta-analysis. Diabet Med 2025;42:e70002                        4 August 2025. Available from https://www.ahrq.              engagement in routine medical care for type 2
65.              Tanhapour  M,  Peimani  M,  Rostam  Niakan         gov/workingforquality/about/nqs-fact-sheets/nqs-             diabetes  in  a  privately  insured  population:  a
Kalhori  S,  et  al.  The  effect  of  personalized                 fact-sheet-0214.html                                         propensity  score-matched  study.  Diabetes  Care
intelligent digital systems for self-care training on               80.          Odugbesan O, Mungmode A, Rioles N, et al.;      2022;45:1193–1200
type  II  diabetes:  a  systematic  review  and  meta-              T1D Exchange Quality Improvement Collaborative.              93.  Jiang  DH,  Herrin  J, Van  Houten  HK,  McCoy
analysis  of  clinical  trials.  Acta  Diabetol  2023;              Increasing  continuous  glucose  monitoring  use  for        RG.  Evaluation  of  high-deductible  health  plans
60:1599–1631                                                        non-Hispanic Black and Hispanic people with type 1           and  acute  glycemic  complications  among  adults
66.         Abu  S,  Llahana  S.  Factors  influencing  the         diabetes:  results  from  the  T1D  Exchange  Quality        with diabetes. JAMA Netw Open 2023;6:e2250602
uptake  of  culturally  tailored  diabetes  self-                   Improvement  Collaborative  Equity  Study.  Clin             94. Lu  CY,  Argetsinger  S,  Lakoma  M,  Zhang  F,
management education and support programmes                         Diabetes 2024;42:40–48                                       Wharam  JF,  Ross-Degnan  D.  Effects  of  adopting
among  ethnic  minority  patients  with  type  2                    81. Odugbesan  O,  Wright  T,  Jones  N-HY,  et  al.;        preventive  drug  lists  on  medication  costs  and
diabetes: a systematic review. Prim Care Diabetes                   T1D Exchange Quality Improvement Collaborative.              disparities  by  income  over  2  years:  a  Natural
2025;19:103–110                                                     Increasing social determinants of health screening           Experiment  for  Translation  in  Diabetes  (NEXT-D)
67.             TRIAD Study Group. Health systems, patients         rates  among  six endocrinology centers  across the          study. Diabetes Care 2025;48:341–352
factors,  and  quality  of  care  for  diabetes:  a                 United  States:  results  from  the  T1D  Exchange           95.    McCoy  RG,  Swarna  KS,  Jiang  DH,  et  al.
synthesis of findings from the TRIAD study. Diabetes                Quality  Improvement  Collaborative.  Clin  Diabetes         Enrollment  in  high-deductible  health  plans  and
Care 2010;33:940–947                                                2024;42:49–55                                                incident diabetes complications. JAMA Netw Open
68.          Schmittdiel JA, Gopalan A, Lin MW, Banerjee S,         82.     Prahalad P, Ebekozien O, Alonso GT, et al.; T1D      2024;7:e243394
Chau CV, Adams AS. Population health management                     Exchange  Quality  Improvement  Collaborative                96.     Gibson  DM.  Estimates of the percentage of
for diabetes: health care system-level approaches for               Study  Group.  Multi-clinic  quality  improvement            US  adults  with  diabetes who  could  be  screened
improving  quality  and  addressing  disparities.  Curr             initiative increases continuous glucose monitoring           for diabetic retinopathy in primary care settings.
Diab Rep 2017;17:31                                                 use  among  adolescents  and  young  adults  with            JAMA Ophthalmol 2019;137:440–444
69. Peterson KA, Carlin CS, Solberg LI, Normington                  type 1 diabetes. Clin Diabetes 2021;39:264–271               97.       Gaffney A, Himmelstein DU, Woolhandler S.
J, Lock EF. Care management processes important                     83.    National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and      Prevalence and correlates of patient rationing of
for high-quality diabetes care. Diabetes Care 2023;                 Kidney  Diseases.  Diabetes  for  Health  Professionals.     insulin  in  the  United  States:  a  national  survey.
46:1762–1769                                                        Accessed  8  August 2025.  Available  from https://          Ann Intern Med 2022;175:1623–1626
70.          Raebel MA, Schmittdiel J, Karter AJ, Konieczny         www.niddk.nih.gov/health-information/professionals/          98.   Cefalu  WT,  Dawes  DE,  Gavlak  G,  et  al.;
JL,  Steiner  JF.  Standardizing  terminology  and                  clinical-tools-patient-management/diabetes                   Insulin  Access  and  Affordability  Working  Group.
definitions of medication adherence and persistence                 84.        O’Connor  PJ,  Sperl-Hillen  JM,  Fazio  CJ,      Insulin  Access  and  Affordability  Working  Group:
in  research  employing  electronic  databases.  Med                Averbeck BM, Rank BH, Margolis  KL. Outpatient               conclusions and recommendations. Diabetes Care
Care 2013;51:S11–S21                                                diabetes clinical decision support: current status           2018;41:1299–1311
71. Feifer C, Nemeth L, Nietert PJ, et al. Different                and future directions. Diabet Med 2016;33:734–741            99.  Centers  for  Medicare  &  Medicaid  Services.
paths  to  high-quality  care:  three  archetypes  of               85.        Forsythe LP, Carman KL, Szydlowski V, et al.      Part D Senior Savings Model. Accessed 8 August
top-performing  practice  sites.  Ann  Fam  Med                     Patient  engagement  in  research:  early  findings          2025.  Available  from https://www.cms.gov/
2007;5:233–241                                                      from  The  Patient-Centered  Outcomes  Research              priorities/innovation/innovation-models/part-
72.              Mungmode  A, Noor N, Weinstock RS,  et al.         Institute. Health Aff (Millwood) 2019;38:359–367             d-savings-model
Making  diabetes  electronic  medical  record  data                 86. Marino  M,  Angier  H,  Springer  R,  et  al. The        100.     Baig K, Dusetzina SB. Premiums and out-of-
actionable: promoting benchmarking and population                   Affordable  Care  Act:  effects  of  insurance  on           pocket  spending  for  long-acting  insulins  under
health improvement using the T1D Exchange Quality                   diabetes biomarkers. Diabetes Care 2020;43:2074–             the Medicare Part D Senior Savings Model. JAMA
Improvement Portal. Clin Diabetes 2022;41:45–55                     2081                                                         2022;328:2161–2162
73.           Powell  RE,  Zaccardi  F,  Beebe  C,  et  al.         87. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.              101.  Baig  KA,  Fry  CE,  Buntin  MB,  Powers  AC,
Strategies  for  overcoming  therapeutic  inertia  in               Health  Insurance  Coverage:  Early  Release  of             Dusetzina SB. Insulin out-of-pocket spending caps
type  2  diabetes:  a  systematic  review  and  meta-               Estimates  From  the  National  Health  Interview            and employer-sponsored insurance: changes in out-
analysis. Diabetes Obes Metab 2021;23:2137–2154                     Survey,  January–June  2024.  Accessed  4  August            of-pocket and total costs for insulin and healthcare.
74.             Herges  JR,  Neumiller  JJ,  McCoy  RG.  Easing     2025. Available from https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/               Health Serv Res 2025:e14656
the financial burden of diabetes management: a                      data/nhis/earlyrelease/insur202412.pdf                       102. American  Diabetes  Association.  State  Insulin
guide  for  patients  and  primary  care  clinicians.               88.    Doucette  ED,  Salas J,  Scherrer  JF. Insurance      Copay Caps. Accessed 8 August 2025. Available from
Clin Diabetes 2021;39:427–436                                       coverage  and  diabetes  quality  indicators  among          https://diabetes.org/tools-resources/affordable-
75.         Young-Hyman  D,  de  Groot  M,  Hill-Briggs  F,         patients  in  NHANES.  Am  J  Manag  Care  2016;             insulin/state-insulin-copay-caps
Gonzalez JS, Hood K, Peyrot M. Psychosocial care                    22:484–490                                                   103.         Suran M. All 3 major insulin manufacturers
for people with diabetes: a position statement of                   89.         Kaiser  Family  Foundation.  2021  Employer      are  cutting  their  prices—here’s  what  the  news
the  American  Diabetes  Association.  Diabetes                     Health Benefits Survey. Accessed 8 August 2025.              means  for  patients  with  diabetes.  JAMA  2023;
Care 2016;39:2126–2140                                              Available  from https://www.kff.org/report-section/          329:1337–1339
76.              Pullen-Smith  B,  Carter-Edwards  L,  Leathers     ehbs-2021-summary-of-findings/#:∼:text=Twenty-               104. American  Diabetes    Association.     Insulin
KH. Community health ambassadors: a model for                       eight%20percent%20of%20covered%20workers%                    Cost  and  Affordability.  Leading  the  Fight  for
engaging  community  leaders  to  promote  better                   20are%20enrolled%20in,as%20an%20indemnity%                   Insulin  Affordability.  Accessed  8  August  2025.
health  in  North  Carolina.  J  Public  Health  Manag              29%20plan%20%5B%20Figure%20D%20%5D                           Available from https://diabetes.org/tools-support/
Pract 2008;14(Suppl.):S73–S81                                       90.      U.S.  Bureau  of  Labor  Statistics.  Employee      insulin-affordability
77.            Neeland IJ, Arafah A, Bourges-Sevenier B, et         benefits—high  deductible  health  plans  and  health        105.         McCoy RG, Van Houten HK, Karaca-Mandic
al.  Second-year  results  from  CINEMA:  a  novel,                 savings  accounts.  Accessed  8  August  2025.               P,  Ross  JS,  Montori  VM,  Shah  ND.  Second-line

2025  December
      10 on  guest
                by     http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S13/848832/dc26s001.pdf
                       from   Downloaded

---



diabetesjournals.org/care     Improving  Care and  Promoting Health  in  Populations  S25

therapy for type 2 diabetes management: the treatment/benefit paradox of cardiovascular and kidney comorbidities. Diabetes Care 2021;44:2302–2311  
106. McCoy RG, Van Houten HK, Deng Y, et al. Comparison of diabetes medications used by adults with commercial insurance vs Medicare Advantage, 2016 to 2019. JAMA Netw Open 2021;4:e2035792  
107. Benning TJ, Heien HC, Herges JR, Creo AL, Al Nofal A, McCoy RG. Glucagon fill rates and cost among children and adolescents with type 1 diabetes in the United States, 2011-2021. Diabetes Res Clin Pract 2023;206:111026  
108. Herges JR, Haag JD, Kosloski-Tarpenning KA, Mara KC, McCoy RG. Gaps in glucagon fills among commercially insured patients receiving a glucagon prescription. Diabetes Res Clin Pract 2023;200:110720  
109. Patel PM, Thomas D, Liu Z, Aldrich-Renner S, Clemons M, Patel BV. Systematic review of disparities in continuous glucose monitoring and insulin pump utilization in the United States: key themes and evidentiary gaps. Diabetes Obes Metab 2024;26:4293–4301  
110. Eberly LA, Yang L, Essien UR, et al. Racial, ethnic, and socioeconomic inequities in glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor agonist use among patients with diabetes in the US. JAMA Health Forum 2021;2:e214182  
111. Essien UR, Singh B, Swabe G, et al. Association of prescription co-payment with adherence to glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor agonist and sodium-glucose cotransporter-2 inhibitor therapies in patients with heart failure and diabetes. JAMA Netw Open 2023;6:e2316290  
112. Taha MB, Valero-Elizondo J, Yahya T, et al. Cost-related medication nonadherence in adults with diabetes in the United States: the National Health Interview Survey 2013–2018. Diabetes Care 2022;45:594–603  
113. Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services. CMS Framework for Health Equity 2022–2032. Accessed 8 August 2025. Available from https://www.cms.gov/files/document/cms-framework-health-equity.pdf  
114. Washington AE, Lipstein SH. The Patient-Centered Outcomes Research Institute–promoting better information, decisions, and health. N Engl J Med 2011;365:e31  
115. Dixon B, Pena M-M, Taveras EM. Lifecourse approach to racial/ethnic disparities in childhood obesity. Adv Nutr 2012;3:73–82  
116. Egede LE, Walker RJ, Linde S, et al. Nonmedical interventions for type 2 diabetes: evidence, actionable strategies, and policy opportunities. Health Aff (Millwood) 2022;41:963–970  
117. Jiang DH, O’Connor PJ, Huguet N, Golden SH, McCoy RG. Modernizing diabetes care quality measures. Health Aff (Millwood) 2022;41:955–962  
118. Joint Commission. R3 Report. Requirement, Rationale, Reference. Accessed 11 September 2025. Available from https://digitalassets.jointcommission.org/api/public/content/e57b92c0e6854a03b27302663b5c1084?v=cec3044d&_gl=1*1xqrmfh*_ga*Lg.*_ga_K31T0BHP4T*czE3NTQ0OTIwNDYkbzEkZzEkdDE3NTQ0OTIxNTUkajU5JGwwJGgw  
119. National Committee for Quality Assurance. Healthcare Effectiveness Data and Information Set (HEDIS-MY) 2024. Accessed 6 August 2025. Available from https://www.ncqa.org/wp-content/uploads/HEDIS-MY-2024-Measure-Description.pdf  
120. Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services. Quality Payment Program. Explore Measures & Activities. Accessed 6 August 2025. Available from https://qpp.cms.gov/mips/explore-measures  
121. Ebekozien O, Mungmode A, Buckingham D, et al. Achieving equity in diabetes research: borrowing from the field of quality improvement using a practical framework and improvement tools. Diabetes Spectr 2022;35:304–312  
122. Odugbesan O, Addala A, Nelson G, et al. Implicit racial-ethnic and insurance-mediated bias to recommending diabetes technology: insights from T1D Exchange Multicenter Pediatric and Adult Diabetes Provider Cohort. Diabetes Technol Ther 2022;24:619–627  
123. Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services. Ensuring Proper Use of Electronic Health Record Features and Capabilities. 2016. Accessed 6 August 2025. Available from https://www.cms.gov/files/document/ehrdecisiontable062816pdf  
124. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Secretary’s Advisory Committee on National Health Promotion and Disease Prevention Objectives for 2030. Accessed 6 August 2025. Available from https://health.gov/healthypeople  
125. National Academy of Sciences. A Framework for Educating Health Professionals to Address the Social Determinants of Health. 2016. Accessed 6 August 2025. Available from https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/27854400  
126. Zakaria NI, Tehranifar P, Laferrère B, Albrecht SS. Racial and ethnic disparities in glycemic control among insured US adults. JAMA Netw Open 2023;6:e2336307  
127. Hershey JA, Morone J, Lipman TH, Hawkes CP. Social determinants of health, goals and outcomes in high-risk children with type 1 diabetes. Can J Diabetes 2021;45:444–450.e1  
128. Walker RJ, Strom Williams J, Egede LE. Influence of race, ethnicity and social determinants of health on diabetes outcomes. Am J Med Sci 2016;351:366–373  
129. Hashemi R, Rabizadeh S, Yadegar A, et al. High prevalence of comorbidities in older adult patients with type 2 diabetes: a cross-sectional survey. BMC Geriatr 2024;24:873  
130. Huang ES. Management of diabetes mellitus in older people with comorbidities. BMJ 2016;353:i2200  
131. O’Gurek DT, Henke C. A practical approach to screening for social determinants of health. Fam Pract Manag 2018;25:7–12  
132. Yan AF, Chen Z, Wang Y, et al. Effectiveness of social needs screening and interventions in clinical settings on utilization, cost, and clinical outcomes: a systematic review. Health Equity 2022;6:454–475  
133. Rabbitt MP, Hales LJ, Burke MP, Coleman-Jensen A. Household Food Security in the United States in 2022 (Report No. ERR-325). U.S. Department of Agriculture, Economic Research Service, 2023. Accessed 11 September 2025. Available from https://search.nal.usda.gov/discovery/fulldisplay?context=L&vid=01NAL_INST:MAIN&docid=alma-9916411232407426  
134. Kirby JB, Bernard D, Liang L. The prevalence of food insecurity is highest among Americans for whom diet is most critical to health. Diabetes Care 2021;44:e131–e132  
135. Levi R, Bleich SN, Seligman HK. Food insecurity and diabetes: overview of intersections and potential dual solutions. Diabetes Care 2023;46:1599–1608  
136. Alawode O, Humble S, Herrick CJ. Food insecurity, SNAP participation and glycemic control in low-income adults with predominantly type 2 diabetes: a cross-sectional analysis using NHANES 2007-2018 data. BMJ Open Diabetes Res Care 2023;11:e003205  
137. Hager ER, Quigg AM, Black MM, et al. Development and validity of a 2-item screen to identify families at risk for food insecurity. Pediatrics 2010;126:e26–e32  
138. Little M, Rosa E, Heasley C, Asif A, Dodd W, Richter A. Promoting healthy food access and nutrition in primary care: a systematic scoping review of food prescription programs. Am J Health Promot 2022;36:518–536  
139. Berkowitz SA, Meigs JB, DeWalt D, et al. Material need insecurities, control of diabetes mellitus, and use of health care resources: results of the Measuring Economic Insecurity in Diabetes study. JAMA Intern Med 2015;175:257–265  
140. Reid LA, Mendoza JA, Merchant AT, et al. Household food insecurity is associated with diabetic ketoacidosis but not severe hypoglycemia or glycemic control in youth and young adults with youth-onset type 2 diabetes. Pediatr Diabetes 2022;23:982–990  
141. White BM, Logan A, Magwood GS. Access to diabetes care for populations experiencing homelessness: an integrated review. Curr Diab Rep 2016;16:112  
142. Stahre M, VanEenwyk J, Siegel P, Njai R. Housing insecurity and the association with health outcomes and unhealthy behaviors, Washington State, 2011. Prev Chronic Dis 2015;12:E109  
143. Bernstein RS, Meurer LN, Plumb EJ, Jackson JL. Diabetes and hypertension prevalence in homeless adults in the United States: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Am J Public Health 2015;105:e46–e60  
144. Montgomery AE, Fargo JD, Kane V, Culhane DP. Development and validation of an instrument to assess imminent risk of homelessness among veterans. Public Health Rep 2014;129:428–436  
145. Baxter AJ, Tweed EJ, Katikireddi SV, Thomson H. Effects of housing first approaches on health and well-being of adults who are homeless or at risk of homelessness: systematic review and meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials. J Epidemiol Community Health 2019;73:379–387  
146. Al-Rousan T, AlHeresh R, Saadi A, et al. Epidemiology of cardiovascular disease and its risk factors among refugees and asylum seekers: systematic review and meta-analysis. Int J Cardiol Cardiovasc Risk Prev 2022;12:200126  
147. Jaung MS, Willis R, Sharma P, et al. Models of care for patients with hypertension and diabetes in humanitarian crises: a systematic review. Health Policy Plan 2021;36:509–532  
148. Olson RM, Nolan CP, Limaye N, Osei M, Palazuelos D. National prevalence of diabetes and barriers to care among U.S. farmworkers and association with migrant worker status. Diabetes Care 2023;46:2188–2192  
149. U.S. Department of Agriculture, National Agricultural Statistics Service. Census of Agriculture. 2022 Census Full Report. Accessed 6 August 2025. Available from https://www.nass.usda.gov/Publications/AgCensus/2022/index.php#full_report

2025  December  
10 on guest by http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S13/848832/dc26s001.pdf Downloaded from  



---

S26   Improviñg Care añd Promotiñg Health  iñ  Populatioñs     Diabetes Care Volume  49,  Supplemeñt  1,  Jañuary  2026

150.           Soto  S,  Yoder  AM,  Aceves  B,  Nuño  T,     glycemic coñtrol añd self-mañagemeñt outcomes               systematic  review  añd  meta-añalysis.  Epidemiol
Sepulveda  R,  Rosales  CB.  Determiñiñg  regioñal            amoñg  type  2  diabetes  mellitus:  a  systematic          Health 2021;43:e2021090
differeñces  iñ  barriers  to  accessiñg  health  care        review. J Diabetes 2023;15:724–735                          166. Fisher  EB,  Boothroyd  RI,  Elstad  EA,  et  al.
amoñg farmworkers usiñg the Natioñal Agricultural             158.   Baumeister A, Aldiñ A, Chakraverty D, et al.         Peer  support  of  complex  health  behaviors  iñ
Workers  Survey.  J  Immigr  Miñor  Health  2023;25:          Iñterveñtioñs  for  improviñg  health  literacy  iñ         preveñtioñ añd disease mañagemeñt with special
324–330                                                       migrañts.  Cochrañe  Database  Syst  Rev  2023;11:          refereñce  to  diabetes:  systematic  reviews.  Cliñ
151. Thoñoñ  F,  Perrot  S,  Yergolkar  AV,  et  al.          CD013303                                                    Diabetes Eñdocriñol 2017;3:4
Electroñic  tools  to  bridge  the  lañguage  gap  iñ         159.  Schapira MM, Fletcher KE, Gilligañ MA, et al.         167. Foster G, Taylor SJC, Eldridge SE, Ramsay J,
health  care  for  people  who  have  migrated:               A  framework  for  health  ñumeracy:  how  patieñts         Griffiths  CJ.  Self-mañagemeñt  educatioñ  pro-
systematic  review.  J  Med  Iñterñet  Res  2021;23:          use  quañtitative  skills  iñ  health  care.  J  Health     grammes by lay leaders for people with chroñic
e25131                                                        Commuñ 2008;13:501–517                                      coñditioñs.  Cochrañe  Database  Syst  Rev  2007:
152.               U.S.  Departmeñt  of  Health  &  Humañ     160.         Ageñcy  for  Healthcare  Research  añd         CD005108
Services.  Natioñal  Stañdards  for  Culturally  añd          Quality.  Cliñical-commuñity  liñkages.  Accessed           168. Piatt  GA,  Rodgers  EA,  Xue  L,  Zgibor  JC.
Liñguistically  Appropriate  Services  (CLAS)  iñ             6  August  2025.  Available  from https://archive.          Iñtegratioñ  añd  utilizatioñ  of  peer  leaders  for
Health  añd  Health  Care.  Accessed  6  August               ahrq.gov/ñcepcr/tools/commuñity/iñdex.html                  diabetes self-mañagemeñt support: results from
2025. Available from https://thiñkculturalhealth              161. Herges  JR,  Matulis  JC,  Kessler  ME,                Project SEED (Support, Educatioñ, añd Evaluatioñ
.hhs.gov/assets/pdfs/EñhañcedNatioñalCLAS                     Ruehmaññ LL, Mara KC, McCoy RG. Evaluatioñ of               iñ Diabetes). Diabetes Educ 2018;44:373–382
Stañdards_Revised_Juñe2025.pdf                                añ eñhañced primary care team model to improve              169.     Roseñthal  EL,  Rush  CH,  Alleñ  CG.  Uñder-
153. Ceñters for Disease Coñtrol añd Preveñtioñ.              diabetes care. Aññ Fam Med 2022;20:505–511                  stañdiñg scope añd competeñcies: a coñtemporary
Health  Literacy.  Talkiñg  Poiñts  About  Health             162. Kasper  AL,  Myers  LA,  Carlsoñ  PN,  et  al.         look at the Uñited States commuñity health worker
Literacy. Accessed 06 August 2025. Available from             Diabetes mañagemeñt for commuñity paramedics:               field:  progress  report  of  the  Commuñity  Health
https://www.cdc.gov/health-literacy/php/about/                developmeñt  añd  implemeñtatioñ  of  a  ñovel              Worker  (CHW)  Core  Coñseñsus  (C3)  Project:
tell-others.html                                              curriculum. Diabetes Spectr 2022;35:367–376                 buildiñg ñatioñal coñseñsus oñ CHW core roles,
154. Nutbeam  D,  Lloyd  JE.  Uñderstañdiñg  añd              163. Evañs  J,  White  P,  Ha  H.  Evaluatiñg  the          skills,  añd  qualities.  CHW  Ceñtral, 2016. Accessed
respoñdiñg to health literacy as a social determiñañt         effectiveñess  of  commuñity  health  worker                6  August  2025.  Available  from https://files
of health. Aññu Rev Public Health 2021;42:159–173             iñterveñtioñs  oñ  glycaemic  coñtrol  iñ  type  2          .ctctcdñ.com/a907c850501/1c1289f0-88cc-49c3-
155.       Marciaño  L,  Cameriñi  A-L,  Schulz  PJ.  The     diabetes: a systematic review añd meta-añalysis.            a238-66def942c147.pdf
role of health literacy iñ diabetes kñowledge, self-          Lañcet 2023;402(Suppl 1):S40                                170. Guide  to  Commuñity  Preveñtive  Services.
care, añd glycemic coñtrol: a meta-añalysis. J Geñ            164.      Ducharme-Smith A, Juñtuñeñ M, Espiñoza A,         Commuñity  health  workers  help              patieñts
Iñterñ Med 2019;34:1007–1017                                  et  al.  Pilot  pragmatic  trial  of  a  commuñity          mañage  diabetes.  Updated  25  October  2022.
156.         Schaffler J, Leuñg K, Tremblay S, et al. The     paramedic diabetes self-mañagemeñt educatioñ                Accessed 06 August 2025. Available from https://
effectiveñess  of  self-mañagemeñt  iñterveñtioñs             program for adults with diabetes. Diabetes Care             www.thecommuñityguide.org/coñteñt/commuñity-
for  iñdividuals  with  low  health  literacy  añd/or         2025;48:2089–2094                                           health-workers-help-patieñts-mañage-diabetes
low  iñcome:  a  descriptive  systematic  review.  J          165. Azmiardi  A,    Murti  B,  Febriñasari     RP,         171.        Cuellar  AE,  Caloñge  BN.  The  Commuñity
Geñ Iñterñ Med 2018;33:510–523                                Tamtomo  DG.  The  effect  of  peer  support  iñ            Preveñtive  Services  Task  Force:  25  years  of
157.         Butayeva J, Ratañ ZA, Dowñie S, Hosseiñzadeh     diabetes  self-mañagemeñt educatioñ  oñ  glycemic           effectiveñess, ecoñomics, añd equity. Am J Prev
H. The impact of health literacy iñterveñtioñs oñ             coñtrol  iñ  patieñts  with  type  2  diabetes:  a          Med 2022;62:e371–e373

2025  December
      10 on  guest
                by     http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S13/848832/dc26s001.pdf
                       from   Downloaded